Technische Universität München
TUM School of Natural Sciences

Coupling phenomena in magnonic hybrid
heterostructures

Manuel M. Müller

Vollständiger Abdruck der von der TUM School of Natural Sciences der Technischen
Universität München zur Erlangung eines Doktors der Naturwissenschaften genehmigten
Dissertation.

Vorsitz:

Prof. Dr. David Egger

Prüfer*innen der Dissertation:

1.

Prof. Dr. Rudolf Gross

2.

apl. Prof. Dr. Martin Brandt

Die Dissertation wurde am 27.10.2023 bei der Technischen Universität München
eingereicht und durch die TUM School of Natural Sciences am 14.12.2023 angenommen.

TECHNISCHE
UNIVERSITÄT
MÜNCHEN

WALTHER MEISSNER INSTITUT

BAYERISCHE
AKADEMIE DER
WISSENSCHAFTEN

Coupling phenomena in magnonic hybrid
heterostructures

Dissertation

Manuel M. Müller

Cover image: Copyright BAdW/Kai Neunert (2020)

’Man has always assumed that he is more intelligent than dolphins because he has
achieved so much–the wheel, New York, wars and so on – while all the dolphins had ever
done was muck about in the water having a good time. But, conversely, the dolphins had
always believed that they were far more intelligent than man – for precisely the same
reasons.’
— Douglas Adams

To my beloved mother and father

Abstract
The control of magnetization dynamics in ferromagnetic thin films is of key interest in the field of magnonics, where one aims at utilizing spin waves or magnons,
the elementary excitations of the magnetic lattice, to store and transport information. Here, a promising method for control is to couple the magnons to other
quantized excitations such as photons, phonons or other solid state excitations. To
this end, the characterization of the coupling rates between magnons and other
elementary excitations as well as the properties of hybridized magnon polaritons
are of key interest. If the coupling rate of the coupling system exceeds the loss
rates of the two individual subsystems, strong coupling is achieved and a coherent
exchange of information between the modes is possible, thus enabling to efficiently
manipulate the magnetization dynamics via the solid-state subsystem coupled to
it. In this thesis, we employ both broadband ferromagnetic resonance experiments
at cryogenic temperatures and microwave resonator spectroscopy to study the
magnetization dynamics of various different magnetic thin film/solid state hybrid
systems. First, we study the magnetization dynamics of magnetic γ-Fe2O3 thin
films exchange-coupled to paramagnetic impurities. We find evidence for the
presence of nonlinear temperature-dependent magnetization damping processes,
that allow us to tune the magnetization damping with temperature. We then investigate the magnetization dynamics of magnetic thin films driven by spin torques
generated by interfacial superconductors by analyzing the inductive coupling
between superconductor/ferromagnet heterostructure and microwave transducer.
Here, we detect large spin torques in the superconducting state, which is of interest
for quantum sensing devices. Turning our attention to the coupling of the magnetization with quasiparticle excitations in superconductors, we then characterize
the magnon-photon coupling of magnetic field robust superconducting Nb70Ti30N
resonators interacting with micropatterned magnetic Co25Fe75 strip structures. We
find evidence for strong coupling. Finally, we investigate the coupling of the magnetic Kittel mode of a Co25Fe75 thin film layer with transverse acoustic phonons in
various substrate materials serving as bulk acoustic resonators. In these hybrid
systems, we detect phononic birefringence, which might enable the realization of
phononic λ/4-plates to transform linear into circularly polarized phonons. These
novel findings contribute to a better understanding of magnetization dynamics in

v

hybrid systems and open up interesting new perspectives for future research in
this area.

vi

Kurzfassung
Die Kontrolle der Magnetisierungsdynamik in ferromagnetischen Dünnschichtfilmen ist von großem Interesse im Bereich der Magnonik, die darauf abzielt, quantisierte Spinwellen oder Magnonen, die elementaren Anregungen des magnetischen Gitters, zur Speicherung und Übertragung von Information zu nutzen. Eine
vielversprechende Methode ist dabei die Kopplung von Magnonen mit anderen
quantisierten Anregungen wie Photonen, Phononen oder anderen Festkörperanregungen. Für diese Zielsetzung ist die genaue Charakterisierung der Kopplungsrate zwischen Magnonen und anderen Elementaranregungen sowie die
Untersuchung der Eigenschaften der durch die Kopplung entstehenden MagnonPolaritonen von großem Interesse. Wenn die Kopplungsrate die Verlustraten
der beiden einzelnen Subsysteme übersteigt, wird eine starke Kopplung erreicht
und ein kohärenter Informationsaustausch zwischen den Moden ist möglich.
Dadurch wird eine effiziente Manipulation der Magnetisierungsdynamik über
das daran gekoppelte Festkörpersubsystem ermöglicht. In dieser Arbeit nutzen
wir sowohl breitbandige Ferromagnetische Resonanz bei kryogenen Temperaturen als auch Mikrowellenresonatorspektroskopie, um die Magnetisierungsdynamik verschiedener magnetischer Dünnschicht-/Festkörper-Hybridsysteme
zu untersuchen. Zunächst untersuchen wir die Magnetisierungsdynamik von
ferrimagnetischen γ-Fe2O3-Dünnschichtfilmen, die mit paramagnetischen Verunreinigungen austauschgekoppelt sind, und finden Hinweise auf das Vorhandensein von nichtlinearen temperaturabhängigen Dämpfungsprozessen der Magnetisierung, die es ermöglichen, die Magnetisierungsdämpfung unter Verwendung der Temperatur einzustellen. Anschließend untersuchen wir die Magnetisierungsdynamik von magnetischen dünnen Schichten, die mit in angrenzenden Supraleitern erzeugten Spinströmen wechselwirken, indem wir die induktive
Kopplung zwischen Supraleiter/Ferro- magnet-Heterostruktur und Mikrowellenleiter analysieren. Hierbei detektieren wir große Spinströme im supraleitenden
Zustand, was für Quantensensorik interessant ist. Danach wenden wir uns
der Kopplung der Magnetisierung mit Quasiteilchenanregungen zu und charakterisieren die Magnon-Photon-Kopplung von magnetfeld robutsten supraleitenden Nb70Ti30N-Resonatoren, die mit mikrostrukturierten magnetischen Co25Fe75Streifenstrukturen wechselwirken, und finden Hinweise auf eine starke Kopplung. Zuletzt untersuchen wir die Kopplung der magnetischen Kittel-Mode einer

vii

Co25Fe75-Dünnschicht mit transversalen akustischen Phononen in verschiedenen
Substratmaterialien, die als akustische Resonatoren dienen. In diesen Hybridsystemen detektieren wir phononische Doppelbrechung, was die Realisierung von
phononischen λ/4-Plättchen zur Umwandlung von linear polarisierten in zirkular
polarisierte Phononen ermöglichen könnte. Diese neuen Erkenntnisse tragen zu
einem besseren Verständnis der Magnetisierungsdynamik in Hybridsystemen bei
und eröffnen interessante neue Perspektiven für zukünftige Forschung auf diesem
Gebiet.

viii

Contents

Abstract

v

Contents

ix

1

Introduction

1

2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics
2.1 Macrospin model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.1 Heisenberg exchange interaction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.2 Magnetization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.3 Effective field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.1.4 Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Ferromagnetic Resonance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Magnetization dynamics in hybrid systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.1 Spin torques in Ferromagnet/Normal metal hybrids . . . .
2.3.2 Spin pumping mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.3 Temperature-dependent magnetic relaxation processes . . .
2.3.4 Magnon-Photon coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3.5 Magnon-Phonon coupling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7
7
7
8
8
11
13
18
18
20
21
24
27

3 Experimental Details
3.1 Thin film deposition process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.1 Operation principle of magnetron sputtering . . . . . . . . .
3.1.2 Growth optimization parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.3 Superbowls sputtering cluster . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.4 Ultradisk sputtering system . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.1.5 Advantages and disadvantages of the Superbowls and Ultradisk sputtering systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 Sample patterning techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3 Experimental procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.3.1 Cryogenic ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy . . . . . .
3.3.2 Characterization of superconducting resonators . . . . . . .

29
29
29
31
33
33

4

Slowly relaxing impurities in maghemite thin films
4.1 Physical properties of γ-Fe2O3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

34
35
37
37
42
47
48

ix

4.2
4.3

4.4
4.5

x

Thin film deposition and structural characterization . . . . . . . . .
Magnetic properties of maghemite thin films . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3.1 Static magnetic properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3.2 Dynamic magnetic properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Discussion of the non-linear magnetic damping . . . . . . . . . . .
Summary and Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

49
53
53
54
58
60

5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures
63
5.1 Inductive detection of spin torques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66
5.1.1 Modifications to the inductive detection technique in the
superconducting state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
5.2 Spin torques in NbN/Py-heterostructures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
5.3 Spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
5.3.1 Growth optimization of TaN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
5.3.2 Broadband ferromagnetic resonance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
5.4 Summary and Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 100

6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave resonators/ferromagnetic microstructure hybrids
103
6.1 Characterization of superconducting NbTiN planar microwave resonators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
6.1.1 Loss mechanisms of superconducting microwave resonators 105
6.1.2 Optimization series of our superconducting resonators . . . 107
6.1.3 Performance of NbTiN resonators at elevated temperatures
and at applied magnetic fields . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 111
6.1.4 Performance of NbTiN resonators at mK temperatures for
quantum science applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114
6.2 Magnon-Photon coupling in thin-film devices . . . . . . . . . . . . 116
6.3 Summary and Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 125

7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic
thin films hybrids
7.1 Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in CoFe/sapphire . .
7.1.1 Qualitative discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.1.2 Experimental detection of phononic birefringence . . . . . .
7.2 Temperature dependence of magnon-phonon-polarons . . . . . . .
7.2.1 temperature dependence of the raw |S21 |-data spectra . . .
7.2.2 Frequency and temperature dependence of the magnetic
and elastic relaxation rate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.2.3 Frequency- and temperature dependence of the effective
coupling rate and cooperativity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.2.4 Study of the tuning of the phononic resonances for sensing
applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

127
129
130
133
141
142
143
147
149

7.3
8

Summary and Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 151

Summary and Outlook
153
8.1 Slowly relaxing impurities in maghemite thin films . . . . . . . . . 154
8.2 Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures . . 154
8.3 Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave resonators/ferromagnetic microstructure hybrids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
8.4 Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films hybrids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157

A Appendix A: Additional experiments on the magnetic properties of
γ-Fe2O3
A1 Identification of potential slowly relaxing impurities . . . . . . . .
A2 Additional data on magnetic properties of maghemite films . . . .
A3 Additional FMR-results for γ − Fe2 O3 thin films . . . . . . . . . . .

161
161
162
164

B Appendix B: Sputter deposition parameters
B1 Sputter deposition parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B2 Superbowls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B3 Ultradisk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

167
167
167
167

C Appendix C: Determination of the superconducting transition temperature
169
D Appendix D: Raw data for the reduced inductance
171
D1 Reduced inductance at room temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171
D2 Reduced inductance in the superconducting state . . . . . . . . . . 172
E Appendix E: Sputter deposition parameters of the TaN thin films
E1 N2 /Ar-gas flow ratio series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E2 Deposition temperature series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E3 Deposition power series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E4 Deposition pressure series . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

173
173
174
174
175

F Appendix F: Superconducting NbTiN microwave resonators
177
F1 X-ray diffraction results of NbTiN thin film grown on HF-dipped Si 177
F2 Quality factors of our NbTiN resonators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 178
F3 Participation ratios and loss tangents extracted from simulation . . 179
181
G Appendix G: Magnetoelastic coupling in CoFe on Al2O3 substrates
G1 Determination of the parameters describing the magnetization dynamics in CoFe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
G1.1 Magnetization dynamics parameters of the CoFe layer as
function of temperature . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 182

xi

G2 Analytical expressions for the velocity splitting of the transverse
modes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
G2.1 Substrate with hexagonal crystallographic order . . . . . . .
G2.2 Cubic crystallographic order . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
G3 Temperature-dependence of the elastic damping by the LandauRumer-mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

xii

183
184
185
186

List of Publications

187

Bibliography

189

Acknowledgements

233

Introduction

1

’We cannot solve our problems with the same thinking we used when we created them.’
— Albert Einstein
This quotation taken from Albert Einstein, one of the most influential physicists of the 20th century, is frequently cited in science to highlight the paramount
importance of testing new ideas to overcome the limitations of existing technological devices by using new material systems, better and more precise device fabrication methods or altogether different physical phenomena. Among a plethora of
research directions, this principle can be applied to the miniaturization of silicon
transistors for integrated circuits to meet the evergrowing demand of raising
computational power of modern information technology. Here increasing current
densities, which limit the maximum clock frequencies due to Joule heating, impose
a critical limit to transistor miniaturization [1]. This problem raises the demand for
new ideas to implement logical circuits. On the material research side, promising
approaches for further downscaling of logic devices include the realization of
transistors made from two-dimensional materials [2, 3], nanowires [4, 5] or tunnel
field-effect transistors (TFETs), [6, 7]. As an alternative to the usage of charge
carriers in these unconventional materials, there are approaches, which aim to
utilize alternate information carriers such as for example photons in the field
photonics [8, 9], plasmons in plasmonics [10, 11] and polaritons in polaritonics [12].
However, one of the arguably most matured fields in this research direction is that
of spintronics, which aims to harness the spin degree of freedom of electrons in a
solid system both in combination with and instead of their charge information.
Magnetoresistive spintronics effects based on the giant- (GMR) [13–15] and tunneling magnetoresistive effect (TMR) have already found application in the form
of magnetic hard disks for information storage, whereas magnetoresistive random
access memory (MRAM) devices [16–18] allow for non-volatile data storage at
comparable read/write speeds to existing static and dynamic random access
memory concepts. This offers a promising venue to tackle the Von Neumann
bottleneck [19] by enabling for in-memory computing [20]. Another spintronicsbased data storage application are three-dimensional racetrack memory concepts,
which aim to store data in the form of magnetic domains or skyrmions to achieve
even higher data storage densities [21–24].
Fundamentally, the spintronics devices listed so far simultaneously utilize
both charge and spin of electrons in their operation. However, there also exist
ideas to exclusively mediate spin information in the form of excitations of the magnetic ground state called spin waves or magnons in the field of magnonics [25–28].
Primary advantages of spin-wave- over existing charge current-based devices

1

are the intrinsic magnonic frequencies situated in the GHz to THz regime [29],
prospects for device miniaturization [30, 31] and vector-based spin-wave computing [28, 32, 33]. One main focal point in the field of magnonics is the identification
of new low magnon-propagation loss magnetic materials to reduce energy consumption of magnon-based applications. Within this thesis, we contribute to this
field in Chapter 4 by characterizing the magnetization dynamics parameters of
the room-temperature ferrimagnetic insulator spinel ferrite γ-Fe2O3 (maghemite)
and discuss the feasibility of its nonlinear magnetization damping properties
induced by the interaction of its magnetization with paramagnetic impurities for
the realization of magnonics devices. Another important aspect of magnonics is
the control of magnetization dynamics. Here, potential avenues include the usage
of various types of hybrid devices. For instance, magnetization dynamics can
be driven via spin-orbit torques [34–38] in ferromagnet/heavy metal bilayer or
multilayer structures. While conventional heavy metals such as platinum [39–42]
or tantalum [43, 44] are intensively studied material systems, exotic materials
and phases have drawn an increasing interest in recent years [45, 46]. In particular, superconductors have been found to exhibit sizable spin torques below
Tc [47–50], though conventional approaches for their quantification employing
resistive measurements are difficult due to the shunting effect of superconducting
materials. This experimental problem has motivated us to study the inverse spinorbit torques manifesting in superconductor/ferromagnet heterostructures from
a different angle by using a phase-sensitive detection technique to measure the
inductive coupling between sample and signal transducer in Chapter 5. Besides
the usage of spin-orbit torques another important perspective for the control
of magnetization dynamics is to couple the magnetic systems to other physical
systems such as for example photonic [51–54], phononic [55–64] or other magnetic
systems [65, 66], where the interactions of the individual quantized subsystem
excitations lead to the formation of hybridized modes, the quantized excitations
of the coupled system [30]. In this thesis, we hybridize the magnetic systems with
two types of excitations: Microwave photons in superconducting resonators made
from the magnetic field robust type II superconductor Nb70Ti30N in Chapter 6
and transverse acoustic phonons propagating in various crystalline substrate
materials in Chapter 7. Our magnon-photon hybrids achieve strong coupling at
temperatures of up to 3 K and hence allow to push magnon-photon devices to
higher operation temperatures, whereas our magnon-phonon hybrids exhibit a
phononic birefringence paving the way towards the interconversion of linear and
circularly polarized phonons.
This thesis is structured as follows:
We begin in Chapter 2 by establishing the theoretical background required to
explain the obtained experimental results of this thesis by introducing the basics
of magnetization dynamics in a simple macrospin model, where we introduce
the concept and components of the effective magnetic field felt by the sample

2

Chapter 1

Introduction

magnetization. We then derive the characteristic equation of motion of the
magnetization namely the so-called Landau-Lifshitz Gilbert equation, which
we solve in the case of uniform precession. Thereby, we obtain an analytical
expression for the evolution of the resonance field as function of frequency called
Kittel equation, which we further simplify for several experimentally relevant cases.
To conclude the theory part of this thesis, we then discuss how the magnetization
dynamics in the magnetic macrospin model are modified, when it is coupled
to various forms of excitations investigated in this thesis such as paramagnetic
impurities, spin torques in superconductor/ferromagnet heterostructures and
quasiparticle excitations like photons and phonons.
In Chapter 3, we describe the details of the experimental methods used in this
thesis. We start with the sample fabrication process via dc magnetron sputtering.
Here we discuss the physics of the sputtering process as well as the different
deposition parameters, which need to be optimized for the optimal growth of
thin films, and detail the used sputtering machines Superbowls and Ultradisk.
Furthermore, we detail the fabrication process of superconducting microwave
resonators via electron beam lithography and reactive ion etching, which are used
for the characterization of magnon-photon hybrids. We then describe, how the
finalized heterostructures fabricated by using these methods are characterized via
either broadband ferromagnetic resonance at cryogenic temperatures in different
experimental geometries in various liquid helium cryostats, whereas the superconducting microwave resonators are studied via microwave resonator spectroscopy
at cryogenic and mK temperatures using both liquid helium and dry pulse tube
cryostats.
In Chapter 4, we characterize the room-temperature ferrimagnetic insulator
spinel ferrite γ-Fe2O3 (maghemite), which is grown with epitaxial strain on MgO
substrates via pulsed laser deposition (PLD), in terms of its epitaxial growth
as well as static and dynamic magnetic properties. While high-resolution x-ray
diffraction (HR-XRD) experiments confirm the good crystalline quality and coherently strained growth of our thin films, SQUID magnetometry reveals the
presence of a sizable density of antiphase boundaries in our γ-Fe2O3 thin films.
Regarding their dynamic magnetic properties studied by cryogenic broadband ferromagnetic resonance (bbFMR), we detect a small negative effective magnetization
Meff , providing further evidence for the presence of a strain-induced perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in our samples. Moreover, we observe a non-linear
evolution of the ferromagnetic resonance-linewidth as function of the microwave
frequency, which we interpret as the coupling of the sample magnetization with
paramagnetic impurities in the so-called slow relaxor mechanism. Its nonlinear
damping properties and strain-induced perpendicular anisotropy render γ-Fe2O3
an interesting material platform for spintronics devices.
The main results presented in this chapter are published in M. Müller, M.
Scheufele, J. Gückelhorn, L. Flacke, M. Weiler, H. Huebl, S. Geprägs, R. Gross, M.

3

Althammer, Reduced effective magnetization and damping by slowly relaxing impurities
in strained γ -Fe2O3 thin films, Journal of Applied Physics 132, 233905 (2022) [67].
In Chapter 5, we move from single magnetic layers to the magnetization
dynamics of ferromagnetic materials in multilayered heterostructure samples. In
detail, we investigate the injection of quasiparticle spin currents into a superconductor via spin pumping from an adjacent FM layer. To this end, we use
NbN/Ni80Fe20(Py)-heterostructures with a Pt spin sink layer and perform cryogenic bbFMR using a coplanar waveguide both as signal detector and microwave
transducer. The phase sensitive detection of the microwave transmission signal is
used to quantitatively extract the inductive coupling strength between sample and
coplanar waveguide, which we interpret in terms of inverse spin-current induced
torques, in our heterostructures as a function of both temperature and frequency.
In the superconducting state of NbN, we observe a negative σd attributed to the
quasiparticle-mediated inverse spin Hall effect (QMiSHE). Moreover, below Tc we
find a large field-like current-induced torque.
Both the theoretical details of the inductive analysis technique as well as
the experimental results are published in M. Müller, L. Liensberger, L. Flacke,
H. Huebl, A. Kamra, W. Belzig, R. Gross, M. Weiler, M. Althammer, TemperatureDependent Spin Transport and Current- Induced Torques in Superconductor-Ferromagnet
Heterostructures, Physical Review Letters 126, 087201 (2021) [68].
To test the validity of our inductive analysis technique, in the second part
of this chapter, we optimize the growth of superconducting TaN thin films on
SiO2 substrates via dc magnetron sputtering. This material is of interest for both
different fields of quantum technology and superconducting spintronics as it is a
magnetic field-robust superconductor with strong spin-orbit interaction. Hence,
we naively expect the spin-orbit torques to be enhanced for this material. In a
following step, we investigate the impact of the strong spin-orbit interaction in
TaN on the inductively detected spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures. In
the superconducting state of TaN, we again detect a negative damping-like spin
torque attributed to the QMiSHE of a larger amplitude compared to the results
for NbN/Py-bilayers, which we attribute to the stronger spin-orbit interaction
in TaN. Furthermore, we again observe the manifestation of a large positive
field-like spin torque of unknown origin matching our results for NbN/Pybilayers. In particular detected the sizable damping-like spin orbit torque in our
superconductor/ferromagnet heterostructures is of interest, as it can be used to
probe spin currents in emergent quantum materials.
The growth optimization of TaN and FMR-experiments on TaN/Py-heterostructures are published in M. Müller, R. Hoepfl, L. Liensberger, S. Geprägs,
H. Huebl, M. Weiler, R. Gross, M. Althammer, Growth optimization of TaN for
superconducting spintronics, Materials for Quantum Technology 1, 045001 (2021)
[69].

4

Chapter 1

Introduction

Chapter 6 is dedicated to the study of magnon-photon coupling in on-chip
magnon-photon hybrid devices with a magnetic strip coupled to superconducting
microwave resonators. In a first step, we study the performance of compact
lumped element planar microwave Nb70 Ti30 N (NbTiN) resonators grown on various substrate materials in external in-plane magnetic fields and over a broad
temperature regime ranging from mK temperatures to the superconducting transition temperature to characterize their applicability in electron spin resonance,
ferromagnetic resonance and quantum applications. Consequently, in a second
step, we use our optimized NbTiN resonators for the implementation of on-chip
magnon-photon hybrid devices with a magnetic strip fabricated from the metallic
ferromagnet Co25Fe75(CoFe) deposited on top of resonators. In our experiments,
we investigate two different types of hybrid devices, where the CoFe is (i) coupled
either directly to the NbTiN layer and (ii) grown on top of an insulating AlN
layer to investigate the impact of a direct ferromagnetic exchange bias on the
magnon-photon coupling. While devices from the former type suffer from high
magnetic loss rates, samples of the latter type exhibit strong coupling. These
results are comparable to state of the art magnon-photon devices and unite the
high coupling rate per spin g0 with the usage of a hard-type-II-superconductor
with the perspective to push these devices to higher operating temperatures.
The results of this optimization process for superconducting NbTiN microwave resonators are published in M. Müller, T. Luschmann, A. Faltermeier,
S. Weichselbaumer, L. Koch, G.B.P. Huber, H.W. Schumacher, N. Ubbelohde, D.
Reifert, T. Scheller, F. Deppe, A. Marx, S. Filipp, M. Althammer, R. Gross, H.
Huebl, Magnetic field robust high quality factor NbTiN superconducting microwave
resonators, Materials for Quantum Technology 2, 015002 (2022) [70].
To conclude our experimental results, in Chapter 7, we experimentally investigate the magnetoelastic coupling between the ferromagnetic resonance modes
in a metallic Co25Fe75 thin film and standing transverse elastic phonon modes in
sapphire, silicon and gadolinium gallium garnet by performing bbFMR experiments at cryogenic temperatures. For all these substrate materials, we observe an
interaction between two resonant phonon modes with the magnetic Kittel mode.
We identify these phonon modes as transverse shear waves propagating with
slightly different velocities, and thus all substrates show phononic birefringence.
Furthermore, in a second step, we exemplarily study the temperature-dependence
of the magnetoelastic coupling of a CoFe thin film with the standing transverse
elastic waves of a sapphire substrate as a function of temperature and frequency.
We observe a strong decrease in the relaxation rate of the elastic modes for decreasing temperatures and a correspondingly vastly enhanced cooperativity C of
the coupled magnon-phonon system. This highlights the importance of performing these experiments at cryogenic temperatures. Magnomechanical devices are
discussed as efficient and broadband microwave signal transducers in the classical

5

and quantum limit, whereas in analogy to optics, phononic birefringence can
allow for the controlled conversion between linear and circular phonons
Our initial bbFMR-experiments on ferromagnetic metal/BAW resonator
hybrids using various substrate materials and observing the manifestation of
phononic birefringence are available on the arxiv as M. Müller, J. Weber, F. Engelhardt, V.A.S.V. Bittencourt, T. Luschmann, M. Cherkasski, S.T.B. Goennenwein, S.
Viola Kusminskiy, S. Geprägs, R. Gross, M. Althammer, H. Huebl Chiral phonons
and phononic birefringence in ferromagnetic metal - bulk acoustic resonator hybrids, arxiv:
2303.08429, (2023) [71].
Finally, in Chapter 8, we summarize the most important results of this thesis
and give a brief outlook on future projects in the field of hybrid magnetization
dynamics.

6

Chapter 1

Introduction

Phenomenological Description of
Magnetization Dynamics

2

In this chapter, we establish the basic theoretical background required to explain
the obtained experimental results of this thesis. We begin by introducing the
macrospin model and define the concepts of magnetization vector M and effective
field Hext in a single-domain ferromagnet in Sec. 2.1. Thereafter, we define and
describe its equation of motion in an external magnetic field, the so-called LandauLifshitz-Gilbert equation (LLG). We extend this model by adding an external
perpendicular oscillating microwave field and derive its linear response function,
the so-called Polder susceptibility χˆp [72] and derive the ferromagnetic resonance
(FMR) equation given by the famous Kittel equation [73] in Sec. 2.2. Depending
on both sample shape and anisotropy, we then present the used experimentally
relevant simplifications of the Kittel equation. In Sec. 2.3, we discuss how the
magnetization dynamics of the magnetic macrospin are modified, when it couples
to the various excitations of the hybrid devices investigated in this thesis. The
presented calculations on the magnetization dynamics of ferromagnetic thin
films closely follow the extensive derivations found in Refs. [74–76], whereas the
theory for the diverse hybrid devices in this thesis are inspired by contemporary
research [34, 77–85].

2.1 Macrospin model
2.1.1 Heisenberg exchange interaction
Ferromagnetism is a quantum-mechanical ordering phenomenon manifesting
on a macroscopic scale [86], where the coulomb interaction in combination with
the Pauli repulsion principle [87] give rise to an effect spin-spin-interaction of
the electrons in a solid. In an atom, the individual electron spins si combine to
a net atomic spin S. Combined with the orbital angular momentum L, it give
rise to the total angular momentum of the atom J = L + S, where the respective
alignment of L and S is given by Hund’s Rules [88]. When neglecting itinerant
electrons, the interaction of localized electrons in an insulating material can be
modeled with the Heisenberg exchange mechanism [30, 86, 89, 90], where the free
energy density of a solid with volume V is defined as
1
Fex = − 2
∑ Eij Ji · Jj ,
h̄ V j6=i,i< j

(2.1)

7

where Eij is the exchange constant and h̄ is the reduced Planck constant [91].
Depending on the sign of Eij , the Heisenberg model can model both a ferromagnetic solid favoring the parallel alignment of the spins for Eij > 0 as well as
antiferromagnetic solid, where the angular momenta align in an antiparallel order
for Eij < 0. In Eq.(2.1) the sum is performed over all atoms i and neighboring
atoms j, where the constriction i > j prevents the double counting of the atomneighbor pairs. We note, that the Heisenberg model can be extended to describe
the magnetic ordering of itinerant ferromagnets, where the exchange interaction is
mediated by conduction electrons [86, 92]. In the following discussion, we restrict
ourselves to ferromagnetic materials.

2.1.2 Magnetization
The magnetic moment µ of an individual atom in a solid associated with the
total angular momentum J is given by
J
µ = − gµB ,
h̄

(2.2)

where g is the Landé g-factor [93], µB is the Bohr magneton [94]. We define the
gyromagnetic ratio γ = gµB /h̄ as the ratio between an atom’s magnetic moment
and its angular momentum. Using this definition, we introduce the magnetization
M as the macroscopic response observable as the sum of the combined individual
magnetic moments of a ferromagnetic volume V
M =

1
µi .
V µ∑
∈V

(2.3)

i

This approach is valid due to the large number of magnetic moments per volume
(≃ 1028 e− /m3 ) [30, 95]. In the absence of domains walls or pinned magnetic
moments in the ferromagnet, the individual µi align in parallel to each other
due to the Heisenberg interaction [see Eq.(2.1)]. Consequently, we can define
the macroscopic magnetization vector as M = Ms m, where the saturation magnetization Ms is the magnitude of the magnetization vector and the unit vector
m = (m x , my , mz ) defines the direction of the unit vector in cartesian coordinates.

2.1.3 Effective field
In equilibrium, the magnetization of a magnetic solid will align in parallel to
the orientation of an effective magnetic field [30, 96]
µ0 Heff = −(

∂
∂
∂
,
,
) Fm = −∇m Fm ,
∂m x ∂my ∂mz

(2.4)

where Fm is the free energy density and µ0 ≈ 4π · 10−7 Vs/Am is the magnetic
vacuum permeability. Notably, from Eq.(2.1), it is apparent, that the Heisenberg

8

Chapter 2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics

exchange governs the alignment of the individual magnetic moment with respect
to each other, but does not generate a favored magnetization direction and consequently does not contribute to Heff .
However the net free energy density Fm comprises several additional free energy
contributions Fi , which do give rise to a preferred orientation direction of M . We
define Fm = ∑i Fi .
In the following, we list and define the most relevant contributions to Fm for
this thesis.
• Zeeman energy:
The magnetization direction can be externally controlled by applying an external magnetic field µ0 Hext via the Zeeman interaction. The corresponding
free energy density is given by [30, 75, 86]
Fzee = −µ0 M · Hext .

(2.5)

We note that only real macroscopic magnetic fields and not fictitious intermolecular fields such as the exchange field contribute to the Zeeman interaction [30, 86]. By plugging Eq. (2.5) into Eq. (2.4), we obtain Hzee = Hext as
the first contribution to Heff .
• Shape anisotropy:
In this thesis, primarily the magnetization dynamics of magnetic thin films
is discussed. The shape of the sample translates to a magnetic anisotropy
called the shape anisotropy. Here, the finite magnetization of a magnetic
material gives rise to fictitious magnetic charges (north and south poles) at
the surface, which are the sources of a stray field Hs outside of the magnetic
volume and a demagnetizing field Hd inside the magnetic volume. To
minimize the energy associated with these fields, M will align along a
certain direction depending on the shape of the magnetic volume [86, 97]. To
quantify the contribution of the demagnetization field Hd to Heff , we model
our magnetic volume as an ellipsoid with its main axes aligned in parallel to
the cartesian coordinate axes for the sake of simplicity. In this case, the free
energy density contribution of the shape anisotropy takes the form [30, 98]
Fd = −

µ0
M N̂M ,
2

(2.6)

where the demagnetization tensor can be written as


Nxx

N̂ =  0
0

0
Nyy
0


0

0 .
Nzz

(2.7)

2.1 Macrospin model

9

Here, the Nii represent the diagonal demagnetization factors along the
cartesian axes, which fulfill the relation Nxx + Nyy + Nzz = 1. For a given
sample shape, the Nii can be determined using the equations given in
Ref. [99]. We insert Eq. (2.6) into Eq. (2.4) to determine the demagnetization
field Hd
µ0 Hd = −µ0 N̂M .
(2.8)
The thin films discussed in this work can be modeled as thin disks with
N⊥ ≃ 1 perpendicular to the thin film surface and Nk ≃ 0 in the film plane.
• Magnetocrystalline anisotropy:
In a crystalline magnetic solid, the magnetocrystalline anisotropy leads to a
minimum of the free energy density in specific directions which we call easy
axes. The energy difference between the hard and easy axes direction can
be expressed by µ0 MHani , that is, in terms of an anisotropy field Hani that
points along a certain crystallographic direction depending on the crystal
symmetry [75,86,100,101]. This phenomenon originates from the coupling of
the net orbital angular momentum L of the valence electrons of 3d-transition
or 4f-rare earth metals to the crystal structure to minimize the Coulomb
energy. Due to the coupling of L to the net spin S of the material induced
by spin-orbit coupling, S is also coupled to the crystal structure. As a
consequence, it is energetically favorable for S to point along a particular
crystallographic axis [86, 100]. Consequently, for different alignments of
the magnetic moments µi , the overlapping of their quantum-mechanical
wave functions is also different giving rise to an energetic splitting in the
Heisenberg exchange interaction energy and electrostatic exchange energy
of the electrons [86]. Depending on the underlying crystalline lattice of the
magnetic volume, the magnetocrystalline contribution to the free energy
Fmc will take different forms [30, 86]. However, as this thesis predominantly
discusses the magnetization dynamics of polycrystalline magnetic thin films,
in the following, we will neglect the contribution of magnetocrystalline
anisotropy fields Hmc to Heff .
• Uniaxial anisotropy:
In a uniaxial anisotropy, the magnetic free energy density Fm is minimized or
maximized along one distinct axis and isotropic in the plane perpendicular
to it. In contrast to the effective field contributions discussed thus far, there
are several different physical mechanism that can give rise to an uniaxial
anisotropy, such as magnetocrystalline anisotropy [86], shape anisotropy,
large spin-orbit interaction from a heavy metal material interfaced with a
ferromagnet [102–105] as well as induced from an elastic strain σ induced at
the interface of the ferromagnet [67, 106–108]. In the following, we summarize all uniaxial effective field contributions, which do not originate from

10

Chapter 2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics

shape anisotropy or magnetocrystalline anisotropy as an uniaxial anisotropy
Hu . To obtain an expression for the uniaxial anisotropy contribution to the
magnetic free energy density Fu , we apply a phenomenological model with
directional cosines. To this end, we write down a Taylor series for Fu (m) in
terms of the energy penalty (1 − m · u) payed by m for being tilted away
from u by the angle ϑ [m · u = |m||u|cos(ϑ )] [86]
Fu = Ku [1 − (u · m)2 ] + O[K2uni (u · m)4 ]

(2.9)

Here Ku is the uniaxial anisotropy constant, K2uni is the second order anisotropy
constant and u the unit vector along the easy axis direction. In Eq. (2.9),
we use only even terms in our Taylor series as we set Fu (m) = Fu (−m) to
model easy axis anisotropy (Note, that the case Fu (m) 6= Fu (−m) describes
easy direction anisotropy). Neglecting the higher order magnetization term,
in case Ku > 0, Eq. (2.9) describes a system with an uniaxial u-direction easy
axis anisotropy, whereas for the case Ku < 0, the u-axis is a magnetic hard
axis [86, 92]. We note, that a strain-induced uniaxial easy axis will play a
key role for the understanding of the magnetization dynamics of γ-Fe2O3 in
Ch. 4.
By inserting Eq. (2.9) into Eq. (2.4), we obtain for the resulting uniaxial
anisotropy contribution Hu to Heff [75, 92]
µ 0 Hu =

2Ku
u.
Ms

(2.10)

Finally, we obtain the effective magnetic field Heff as the sum of all the
previously listed contributions resulting in
Heff = Hext + Hd + Hu = Hext − N̂M + Hu u.

(2.11)

2.1.4 Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert equation
As previously established, the magnetic moments µ of isolated atoms are related to the atomic angular momentum J via Eq. (2.2). We define the macroscopic
magnetic moment µges = VM , where V is the sample volume. The total angular
momentum of the sample Lges is then given by [86]
Lges = −

µges
.
γ

(2.12)

In a classical picture, the effective field Heff exerts a torque τ on the magnetization
M in the form
dLges
V ∂M
τ =
=−
= −µges × µ0 Heff .
(2.13)
dt
γ ∂t

2.1 Macrospin model

11

Heff
M × dM/dt
-M × Heff
φ

z
x

M

y

This torque hence forces µges to precess around Heff
with an angular frequency ω.
With this, the dynamic equation of motion of M
known as the Landau-Lifshitz equation [109] can be
derived by rewriting Eq. (2.13) in terms of the magnetization M
dM
= −γM × µ0 Heff .
(2.14)
dt
Eq. (2.14) describes the magnetization dynamics in

Fig. 2.1. – Schematic depiction of the magnetiza- an idealized unattenuated case, where M continuously
tion dynamics in the ma- precesses around H at a constant cone angle ϕ. In real
eff
crospin model. Adapted
physical
systems,
there
exist various relaxation mechfrom Ref. [30].

anisms for M such as the magnon-phonon relaxation mechanism [110–113],
two-magnon scattering processes [114–116] and intrinsic damping processes from
electronic intraband and interband transitions [117, 118]. To obtain a more realistic model, Gilbert introduced a phenomenological material-dependent Gilbert
damping parameter α to Eq. (2.14) [119] to account for the loss of angular momentum in the magnetization dynamics and proposed the Landau-Lifshitz-Gilbert
(LLG)-equation
dM
dM
α
= −γ M × µ0 Heff +
M×
.
dt
|
{z
} Ms | {z dt }
precession

(2.15)

damping

We note that the Gilbert damping term constitutes a small perturbation in
Eq. (2.15) as the values for α in real physical systems typically are in the 10−5 ≤
α ≤ 10−2 -range. Hence the temporal evolution of the magnetization dynamics
dM
dt is primarily governed by the magnetization precession term M × µ0 Heff . As
a consequence, the Gilbert damping term M × dM
dt points perpendicularly to both
the magnetization M and the magnetization precession term M × µ0 Heff and
thus faces towards the rotation axis, effectively reducing the precession cone angle
ϕ as a function of time. The resulting trajectory for M is a spiral motion around
Heff , as schematically depicted in Fig. 2.1, until M has relaxed into its equilibrium
position parallel to Heff . The system can hence be understood in analogy to a
damped harmonic oscillator in classical mechanics [30].

12

Chapter 2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics

2.2 Ferromagnetic Resonance
In the previous section, we have discussed the magHeff
netization dynamics of a magnetic sample with magnex y
tization M exposed to a static external magnetic field
-M × Heff
Hext . We found, that M will start to precess around
M × dM/dt
Hext and due to a finite damping eventually relax in
-M × hrf
parallel to it. In this section, we extend on this model
M
φ
z
by introducing an additional oscillating driving field
hrf (t) perpendicular to the external static field Hext
y
x
as illustrated in Fig. 2.2, which exerts an additional
Fig. 2.2. – Schematic depiction of ferromagnetic torque M × hrf on the magnetization. This system can
resonance, where an ad- then be modeled as a driven, damped harmonic oscilditional driving torque lator. Consequently, we expect to observe a resonant
(M × hrf ) by the oscillating field hrf compen- enhancement of the precession cone angle ϕ, when the
sates the damping torque driving frequency of hrf (t) matches the precession fre(M × dM /dt).
quency ω of M and the displacement of M × hrf caused
by the external drive resonantly counteracts the damping (M × dM /dt). The following derivations will closely follow the compact
overviews provided by previous works in Refs. [30, 92, 120–122], which are in turn
based on the extensive derivations found in Refs. [75, 76, 96].
We model the dynamically driven magnetization dynamics by deriving the
response function of the magnetization M of an ellipsoidal sample, which is
exposed to a constant external magnetic field applied along the z-axis (H = Hext z)
and dynamically driven by an oscillatory field hrf (t) = (hrf,x (t), hrf,y (t), 0)> in
the x-y-plane (see Fig. 2.2). We assume, that its ellipsoidal symmetry axes point
along the cartesian axes in Fig. 2.2 so that its demagnetization tensor is diagonal
with the components Nxx , Nyy and Nzz . Furthermore, we define a generalized
uniaxial anisotropy vector u = (u x , uy , uz )> . Adding hrf (t) to the effective field
in Eq. (2.11), we obtain
hrf

Heff = Hext + Hd + Hu + hrf (t)

 

− Nxx Mx (t) + u x Hu
hrf,x (t)

 

=  − Nyy My (t) + uy Hu  +  hrf,y (t)  .
Hext − Nzz Ms + uz Hu
0

(2.16)

Here, we account for the effect of the excited magnetization dynamics in the x-yplane on the demagnetization field via the time-dependent Nii Mi (t)-terms. This
simplification can be made under the assumptions of magnetization dynamics
with a small precession cone angle ϕ, where Mx, y  Mz and |hrf |  |Hext |.
Furthermore, in Eq. (2.16) we use a fixed magnitude of the magnetization vector
|M | = Ms , which points in parallel to Heff [30, 123]. In this simplified approach,

2.2 Ferromagnetic Resonance

13

the magnetization M can be expressed as the sum of a time-independent part M0
and a time-dependent response Mrf (t) as



Mx (t )


M = M0 + Mrf (t) =  My (t)  .
Ms

(2.17)

We use a harmonic ansatz to model the magnetization dynamics Mrf (t) in an
oscillating magnetic field hrf (t)
hrf (t) = (hrf,x , hrf.y , 0)> · eiωt

(2.18)

Mrf (t) = ( Mrf,x , Mrf,y , 0)> · eiωt

and insert Eqs. (2.16)-(2.18) into the LLG-equation in Eq. (2.15) resulting in an
expression of the form
!
!
hrf,x
M
rf,x
= χ̂P−1
,
(2.19)
hrf,y
Mrf,y
where the Polder susceptibility χ̂P [72] describes the linear response of Mrf (t) to
an external perturbation hrf (t).
Here, χ̂P is of the form [92]
χ̂P =

χ xx χ xy
χyx χyy

!

µ0 Ms
=
Det(χ̂P−1 )

A11

iω
γµ0

iω
− γµ
0

A22

!
(2.20)

with the diagonal entries
iωα
γµ0
iωα
A22 = Hext + ( Nxx − Nzz ) · Ms − (u x − uz ) · Hu +
.
γµ0
A11 = Hext + ( Nyy − Nzz ) · Ms − (uy − uz ) · Hu +

(2.21)

The Polder susceptibility χ̂P is a complex function (χ̂P = χ̂0 + i χ̂00 ) consisting
of a dispersive real part χ̂0 and a dissipative imaginary part χ̂00 . The characteristic
behavior of the susceptibility components χ0 and χ00 as a function of external
magnetic field Hext for the case of a magnetic thin film sample without uniaxial
anisotropy in an external magnetic field Hext k z (u x = uy = uz = Nxx = Nyy = 0
and Nzz =1) at a frequency f = ω/2π = 10 GHz and using the magnetic parameters
for thin film Permalloy [124, 125] (Ni80Fe20, Py) (µ0 Ms = 1.0 T, g = 2.1 and
α = 0.006) is illustrated in Fig. 2.3(a). In order to obtain the resonance field Hres
!
as a function of frequency f res = ωres /2π, we solve the real part of Det(χ̂P ) = 0 in

14

Chapter 2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics

(c )
p

1

1 .0 0
H

e x t/ H

z z =

1 )

0 .5

0
1 .0 2

re s

o o p (N

ip

∆H
0 .9 8

e
ip

H

x c 'x x

e r

1 )

h
sp

1 .0

(N

x c 'x ' x

o o

xx =

( (b b ) )

e

2
re s
s

-0 .2

H

(a )

re s / M

( a r b . u n it)

0 .0

c x x

0 .2

0 .0
0

1

2

2p f / ( g µ 0 M

0 .0 1

s )

1
H

e x t/ M

1 0 0
s

Fig. 2.3. – (a) Real and imaginary part of the Polder susceptibility χ̂P for f = ω/2π =
10 GHz, µ0 Ms = 1.0 T, g = 2.1 , α = 0.006 as function of external magnetic field Hext . The
gray dashed line indicates the resonance field Hres and the gray colored area represents the
resonance linewidth ∆H. (b) Resonance field Hres as function of f derived from Eq. (2.22)
for a spherical sample (yellow) and a thin film in ip- and oop-geometry. (c) Ellipticity e
calculated using Eq. (2.31) as function of Hext for an ip- (Nxx = 1) and oop-configuration
(Nzz = 1).

Eq. (2.20) for Hres . The resulting solution called the Kittel equation [73] is given
by [92]
1
1
Hres = − ( Nxx + Nyy − 2Nzz ) Ms + (u x + uy − 2uz ) Hu
2
s2

2 

[( Nyy − Nxx ) Ms − (uy − u x ) Hu ] 2
2π f
+
+
.
γµ0
2

(2.22)

This equation allows to determine the resonance frequency for samples with
varying shapes by adjusting Nii as well as for different uniaxial anisotropy field
magnitudes Hu and directions u. For the results in this thesis, in particular the
case of a perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) will be relevant. Hence, for
the sake of simplicity, we set u = (0, 0, 1)> .
In the following, we will discuss the dispersion of Eq. (2.22) in three experimentally
relevant cases:
• Sphere:
For a spherical sample, the diagonal demagnetization factors are equal
(Nxx = Nyy = Nzz = 1/3) and hence the shape anisotropy contribution
cancels out in Eq. (2.22) resulting in
Hres =

2π f
− Hu .
γµ0

(2.23)

• Thin film out-of-plane (oop):
For a magnetic thin film exposed to a magnetic field applied along the
surface normal (Hext ∝ z) with layer thicknesslateral dimension, we

2.2 Ferromagnetic Resonance

15

approximate the demagnetization factors as Nxx = Nyy = 0 and Nzz = 1.
For this case, the Kittel equation takes the form
Heff = Hres − Meff =

2π f
,
γµ0

(2.24)

where we define Meff = Ms − Hu as the effective magnetization.
• Thin film in-plane (ip):
For a magnetic thin film exposed to a magnetic field applied in the sample
plane without a loss of generality, the shape anisotropy takes the form
Nxx = 1 and Nyy = Nzz = 0. Consequently, Eq. (2.22) can be simplified to
1
Hres = − Hu − Ms +
2

s

2π f
γµ0

2



+

Ms
2

2
.

(2.25)

To account for the potential presence of in-plane uniaxial anisotropies, we use a
modified version of Eq. (2.25) in Ch. 5
1
oop
Hres = − Hu − Meff +
2

s

2π f
γµ0

2



+

Meff
2

2
.

(2.26)

The Kittel equation for these three cases for Hu = 0 is plotted in Fig. 2.3(b).
A sizable finite Hu in Fig. 2.3(b) would result in a shift of the dispersion curves
along the y-axis.
Apart from determining an analytical expression for the resonance field
Hres as a function of frequency f using the Kittel equation via Eq. (2.22) , the
Polder susceptibility χ̂p also allows to determine the dissipative behavior of the
ferromagnetic precession in its imaginary part. By solving the imaginary part of
!
Det(χ̂P ) = 0 using Eq. (2.20), we obtain an expression for the fanning out of the
ferromagnetic resonance linewidth ∆H given as the full-width at half-maximum
of the ferromagnetic resonance as function of frequency
∆H = 2

2π f α
.
γµ0

(2.27)

We note, that Eq. (2.27) holds irrespective of sample shape and anisotropy as well
as measurement geometry. The material-dependent Gilbert damping parameter
α can hence be obtained by studying ∆H as function of f . In real ferromagnetic
resonance experiments, ∆H may not intersect ∆H = 0 at f = 0 but exhibit an
additional offset in ferromagnetic resonance linewidth called the inhomogeneous
line broadening Hinh caused by spatial variations of the sample and experimental
parameters. Hence, a more realistic dispersion in ∆H ( f ) is given by

16

Chapter 2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics

∆H = Hinh + 2 ·

2π f α
.
µ0 γ

(2.28)

There exist several potential reasons for the manifestation of a non-zero Hinh
in experiments ranging from measurement setup misalignment issues, thermal
heating effects from the microwave drive over inhomogeneities in the sample
to two-magnon scattering processes [126]. In rough terms it can be taken as a
measure of the thin film homogeneity in our experiments [92] as the used broadband ferromagnetic resonance approach outlined in Ch. 3 probes the integrated
response of the sample area underneath the microwave drive.
Having derived explicit expressions for the resonance field and linewidth, we
now discuss the magnitude of the individual Polder susceptibility components in
Eq. (2.20). Under the assumption α  1 we can express the resonant amplitude of
the off-diagonal elements of χˆp in Eq. (2.20) as [83]

|χyx (ωres )| = |χyx (ωres )| ≈

Ms
.
2∆H

(2.29)

The Polder susceptibility in Eq. (2.20) can then be approximated as
χˆp ≈ χyx
where
e=

Mrf,x
≈
Mrf,y

s

!
ie −1
,
i
1
e

(2.30)

Hext + ( Nyy − Nzz ) · Ms − (uy − uz ) · Hu
Hext + ( Nxx − Nzz ) · Ms − (u x − uz ) · Hu

(2.31)

is a measure for the ellipticity f = 1 − e of the precession [83]. Neglecting
uniaxial anisotropy (Hu = 0), we plot e as function of Hext /Ms in Fig. 2.3 for the
magnetic field applied in the oop-direction (Nxx = Nyy = 0, Nzz = 1) (red line)
and in the ip-direction along the x-axis (Nyy = Nzz = 0, Nxx = 1) (blue line).
We note, that the magnetization precession of a magnetic thin film is circular
(e = 1) for the magnetic field applied in the oop-direction, but exhibits a finite
ellipticity, when applied in the in-plane direction. For sufficiently large external
fields Hext /Ms  1, the magnetization precesses circularly (e → 1) irrespective of
sample orientation with respect to the external field.

2.2 Ferromagnetic Resonance

17

2.3 Magnetization dynamics in hybrid systems
In the model derived above, the magnetization dynamics of a homogeneously
magnetized magnetic ellipsoid with rotational axes along the cartesian axes has
been derived and simplified further for the case of magnetic thin films in different
geometries. In the following, we discuss, how the coupling of the thin film
magnetization dynamics is modified, when it interacts with the various different
excitations in the hybrid samples investigated in this thesis such as for example
phononic excitations or paramagnetic impurities. In detail, we first introduce
the coupling between the magnetization dynamics in a ferromagnetic layer and
charge currents in an adjacent normal metal layer via spin torques and the the
injection of angular momentum into thin film layers adjacent to the magnetic layer
via spin pumping necessary for the interpretation of the results in Ch. 5. The
presented derivations are based on Refs. [34, 83–85]. Thereafter, we discuss how
the magnetization dynamics of magnetic thin films are affected by the coupling
to paramagnetic impurities via the so-called slow-relaxor and valence exchange
mechanism as detected for the γ-Fe2O3 thin films in Ch. 4 closely following the
derivations in Refs. [81, 82]. Finally, we will discuss the conceptually similar
fundamentals of both magnon-photon- and magnon-phonon coupling discussed
in chapters 6 and 7. Presented calculations for the magnon-photon-coupling are
adapted from the calculations presented in Refs. [78–80], whereas our derivations
for the magnon-photon coupling strength are inspired by Ref. [77].

2.3.1 Spin torques in Ferromagnet/Normal metal hybrids
When normal metal (NM) films are attached to ferromagnetic (FM) films,
the magnetization dynamics are altered due to a finite coupling between the two
constituents. The coupling can lead to an additional driving or damping of the
magnetization dynamics, which can be described by additional torques. We can
distinguish between so-called field-like spin torques, which act in the same way
as a magnetic driving field by counteracting the damping, and so-called dampinglike spin torques, which are exactly opposite to the field-like torque acting as an
additional damping process [34, 83, 84]. Both torques can be represented by two
additional magnetic field contributions: the field-like contribution Hf pointing
along Heff and the damping-like contribution Hd in parallel to M × Heff .
There are several physical origins for these additional torques. If we create a
perturbation in the NM film by driving a charge current Jc through it, we generate
both an Oersted field and a spin current via the Spin Hall effect (SHE) [35, 36],
both of which generate additional field-like and damping-like spin torques in the
adjacent FM layer. Consequently, the driving of a charge current in NM also has a
finite effect on the magnetization dynamics in the FM.
On the other hand, if we drive magnetization dynamics in the FM layer by
applying an AC magnetic field, the Oersted fields of drive and dynamics will also

18

Chapter 2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics

induce eddy currents in the adjacent NM layer. Moreover, the magnetization dynamics induced in the FM layer will lead to the injection of a dynamic spin current
Js into the NM layer, as will be discussed in greater detail in the next section 2.3.2.
Via the inverse SHE [127, 128], this spin current will generate a charge current in
the NM layer. Both effects cause a damping of the magnetization dynamics in the
FM, which can be described by additional damping-like spin torques. Hence, the
reciprocal effect, i.e. the driving of the magnetization dynamics in a FM has a
finite effect on the charge current flowing in the NM. In literature the processes,
where a charge current in the NM induces a torque on the magnetization in the
adjacent FM layer are commonly denoted as ’spin torques’, whereas the reciprocal
effect, where magnetization effects in the FM layer generate a charge current in
the NM layer are called ’inverse spin torques’ [34, 83, 84]. This relation between
spin torques and inverse spin torques is illustrated in Fig. 2.4.
Spin torque
Jc ,E

Inverse spin torque
Onsager
reciprocity

Normal metal
τ
m

Jc ,E
Normal Metal

m
Ferromagnet

Ferromagnet

∂m
∂t

Fig. 2.4. – Spin torque and inverse spin torque in ferromagnet/normal metal heterostructures. For spin torques, a charge current Jc driven by an applied electric field E in the
NM layer with thickness dNM gives rise to a torque τ acting on the magnetization M of
the adjacent FM layer with layer thickness dFM . In the reciprocal process, a dynamically
precessing magnetization ∂M /∂t in the FM layer induces an electric field E in the NM
layer, which in turn drives a charge current Jc . Adapted from Ref. [120].

In a linear response model, the cross-coupling between torques τ and charge
current densities Jc driven by the magnetization dynamics ∂m/∂t in the FM layer
and an applied dc electric field E in the NM layer is given by [83, 84]
τ
Jc

!

"

= t̂ ◦
t̂ =

m× −m×
n× −n×

!#

∂m/∂t
n×E

!

!
−α/γMs
σST h̄/(2edFM )
,
σNM
σST h̄/[2e(dFM + dNM )]

(2.32)

where, m and n are unit vectors pointing along the magnetization and surface
normal, the dNM and dFM denote the layer thicknesses of the NM and FM layer,
respectively and σNM is the conductivity of the NM layer. Furthermore, we have
introduced the spin torque conductivity σST in units of (Ωm)−1 as the scaling
parameter of the spin torques. The spin torque conductivity is a complex quantity
σST = σf + iσd with the real part σf corresponding to the added contribution of

2.3

Magnetization dynamics in hybrid systems

19

all field-like spin torques and the imaginary part σd representing the sum of
all damping-like torques. Note, that in the case σST = 0, charge currents Jc in
the normal metal and magnetization torques τ in the ferromagnetic layer are
uncoupled and the ordinary Gilbert damping torque in the LLG equation (2.15)
τ = −(α/γ)∂M /∂t and the ohmic relation Jc = σNM E are restored. For the
NM/FM-heterostructures discussed in this thesis, we attribute σf to the sum of
the spin torque conductivity contributions of the ordinary Faraday effect σF and of
the inverse Rashba Edelstein effect σiREE [129] resulting in σf = σiREE − σF [83, 84].
Importantly, it is impossible to disentangle these contributions via symmetry
arguments [83, 130]. On the other hand, in our hybrid NM/FM-heterostructures,
the damping-like torque is related to the SHE via ΘSH T = σd /σNM , where T is the
interface transparency for spins at the NM/FM-interface. We note that σNM , σST
and α can strictly only be assumed to be isotropic in the case of polycrystalline FM
and NM layers [83]. In crystalline materials, these quantities need to be replaced
by tensors in Eq. (2.32).

2.3.2 Spin pumping mechanism
In the previous section 2.2, we have outlined, how the various magnetization
dynamics parameters can be extracted from the frequency-dependence of the
ferromagnetic resonance field µ0 Hres and linewidth µ0 ∆H. As the various sources
for magnetization damping are often not known, the phenomenological Gilbert
damping parameter α has been introduced. It constitutes a measure of the total
dissipation of angular momentum by all the various loss mechanisms in the
magnetic materials such as for example eddy current damping [123,131], radiative
damping [132], or two-magnon scattering [114–116]. As already mentioned above,
interfacing a magnetic thin film with an adjacent normal metal layer gives rise to
an additional loss channel for α via the injection of an angular momentum in the
form of a dynamic spin current density Js into the adjacent normal metal layer.
This process is called spin pumping [85]. The spin current density injected across
the interface is given by

Js =




h̄ 
Re( G↑↓ )M × dM − Im( G↑↓ ) dM  ,

4π |
dt } |
{z
{z dt }
damping−like

(2.33)

field−like

where G↑↓ is the spin-mixing conductance, which is a material- and interfacedependent parameter that describes the transport of spins no-collinear to the
magnetization of the ferromagnetic layer [133]. The spin-pumping mechanism
acts on the magnetization dynamics as an additional spin torque in the LLG in the
form τs = γ/( Ms dFM )Js , where dFM is the layer thickness of the FM layer. Here,
the first term of Eq. (2.33) corresponds to an additional damping-like term in the
LLG, whereas the second term has the symmetry of a field-like contribution to the

20

Chapter 2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics

precession of M . As the imaginary part of the spin-mixing conductance G↑↓ is
typically negligibly small [36], spin pumping is primarily discussed in terms of its
damping-like contribution as an enhanced damping αSP in the LLG given by [134]
αSP =

gµB
1
G↑↓
.
4πMs
dFM

(2.34)

The net Gilbert damping can hence be written as the sum of the intrinsic contribution α0 and the spin-pumping contribution αSP
α = α0 + αSP .

(2.35)

As αSP is inversely proportional to the layer thickness of the FM, samples with low
dFM are required to detect the effect of spin pumping. Hence, to experimentally
determine the spin-mixing conductance G↑↓ , the net Gilbert damping α of a
series of ferromagnet/normal metal samples with varying low dFM is typically
studied [40, 132, 135, 136]. Moreover, via the iSHE, this spin current injected via
spin pumping is converted into a charge current in the adjacent NM layer and
thereby contributes as a damping-like torque conductivity σd in Eq. (2.32), which
can be detected via the inductive analysis technique [84] presented in Ch. 5.

2.3.3 Temperature-dependent magnetic relaxation processes
The temperature dependence of the magnetization dynamics of magnetic
materials can be instructive to study the hybridization of magnetic excitations
with other solid-state excitations [137, 138] or exotic spin textures, which manifest primarily at cryogenic temperatures [30, 139]. In particular for the ferromagnetic resonance linewidth ∆H of the ferrimagnetic insulator yttrium iron
garnet (Y3Fe5O12, YIG), the temperature-dependence exhibits one or several local
maxima for certain temperatures T [140–142]. These features are attributed to
several different temperature-dependent magnetic relaxation processes generated by ionic impurities introduced in the magnetic thin film during its growth
process [81, 100, 143]. There are several theoretical models for these magnetic
relaxation processes, which then manifest at different temperatures and excitation
frequencies. In the following, we will introduce the mechanisms relevant for
the magnetization dynamics of γ-Fe2O3 in Ch. 4 of this thesis: (i) The slowlyrelaxing impurity mechanism [82, 140, 144–146] and (ii) the valence-exchange
mechanism [100, 147, 148].
• Slowly-relaxing impurity:
In the slowly-relaxing impurity model, the energy levels of substitutional
ionic impurities effectively constitute a disordered magnetic subsystem in
the crystal structure to which the host magnetic material can couple via the
Heisenberg exchange interaction (see Sec. 2.1). The ionic energy levels of the

2.3

Magnetization dynamics in hybrid systems

21

impurities are periodically modulated by the precession of M as the strength
of the exchange coupling depends on the relative orientation of M and the
impurity magnetic moments. This modulation leads to a net energy transfer
from the magnetic subsystem to the impurity system, when the impurities
relax towards the thermal equilibrium [81]. This process is illustrated in
Fig. 2.5(a) and (b). As a result, the thermal population is redistributed
(a)

(b)

A
M
Heff

E2

y
z

Valence exchange
E2

E

φ

E

B

(c)

Slowly relaxing impuri�es

E1

E1

x

0

A

(°)

B

360

0

A
2.755

(°)

B

360

4.252

1.4 around
2.1 the effective field in the x-y-plane (see
Fig. 2.5. – (a) Magnetization precession
Fig. 2.3). The angle ϕ denotes the polar orientation of M in the x-y-plane. The points A
and B denote two exemplary magnetization orientations. (b) Energy variation of the two
lowest energy levels of the slowly-relaxing impurity as function of ϕ. (c) Energy variation
of the two lowest energy levels of the additional electron exchanged between the two
neighboring lattice sites in the valence-exchange mechanism as function of ϕ. Adapted
from Refs. [81, 143].

between the two energy levels E1 and E2 . For the magnetization orientation
marked by position A in Fig. 2.5(a), the energy splitting between E2 and E1
oscillates as function of ϕ causing a redistribution between the equilibrium
occupations NEi of the two energy levels with ions transitioning to E1 and
transferring energy to the lattice in the process [81]. For the magnetization
at position B, the equilibrium population of the ions shifts towards level
E2 and hence energy is absorbed from the lattice. The thermal relaxation
time of the ions is given by τ and is typically in the ≃ ps-range. When the
magnetization is driven in the GHz-range by the frequency ω, a maximum
energy transfer to the lattice is achieved for ωτ = 1 giving rise to a peak in
the FMR-linewidth as a function of ω. The strong temperature-dependence
of this process results from the population distribution of the two energy
levels being given by


NE2
E2 − E1
= exp
,
(2.36)
NE1
kB T
where kB is the Boltzmann constant. As a consequence, the slowly-relaxing
impurity process is strongly temperature- and frequency-dependent. For
the slowly relaxing impurity mechanism, the temperature-dependent peak

22

Chapter 2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics

in ∆H ( T ) usually manifests at cryogenic temperatures in the range 10 K ≤
T ≤ 50 K [140–142].
In the presence of slowly relaxing impurities and assuming a uniform uniaxial out-of-plane anisotropy field Hu parallel to the applied static magnetic
field, the total dispersion of the ferromagnetic resonance and the change of
linewidth with frequency can then be expressed as [82, 146]
hf
[1 + Im(αslow ( f ))]
gµB
hf
µ0 ∆H = µ0 Hinh + 2 ·
[α + Re(αslow ( f ))].
gµB

µ0 Hres = µ0 Meff +

(2.37)
(2.38)

Here, the slowly-relaxing impurity contribution is given by αslow ( f ) [82]

τ
2π f τ 2
αslow ( f ) = CF ( T )
−i
,
1 + (2π f τ )2
1 + (2π f τ )2


(2.39)

where the constant C is given by [82, 146]
gµB Nslow
C=
8Ms h̄kB T

"

∂Eslow
∂φ

2



+

∂Eslow
∂θ

2 #
.

(2.40)

In Eq. (2.40), Nslow represents the concentration of the slowly relaxing impurities and Eslow is the spin splitting of the paramagnetic impurity energy
levels induced by the exchange field of the magnetically ordered layer. The
angular derivatives of Eslow (where θ and φ are the azimuthal and polar
angles with respect to the magnetic field axis along z, respectively) are a
consequence of the anisotropic exchange coupling of the impurity atoms
with the ferromagnetic moment [82]. The function F ( T ) describes the temperature dependence of the damping contribution by the slowly relaxing
impurities and can be expressed as
F ( T ) = sech

2



Eslow
kB T


.

(2.41)

• Valence-exchange model:
The so-called valence-exchange or charge-transfer mechanism [100, 147,
148] manifests itself if mixed-valent ions are present in the ferromagnetic
sample (i.e. Fe2+ or Fe4+ ions in YIG with nominal only Fe3+ -ions). In
this case electrons can hop between the different valence lattice sites. This
hopping mediates a net energy transfer from the dynamically precessing
magnetization to the crystal lattice and can thereby increase the damping.
This process is illustrated in Fig. 2.5(c). Here, 1 and 2 denote two neighboring
lattice sites exchanging the additional valence electron. Depending on the
alignment of the magnetization M in Fig. 2.5(a), the energy at sites 1 and

2.3

Magnetization dynamics in hybrid systems

23

2 are periodically modulated and their thermal equilibrium population
depends on ϕ. At position A, an extra electron at site 2 will hop to site
1 by transferring its excess energy E2 − E1 to the lattice. Conversely, at
magnetization position B, the electron will hop back to its initial site 2 by
again transferring the energy E2 − E1 to the lattice [81]. In analogy to the
slowly-relaxing-impurity mechanism, the maximum energy is transferred
from the magnetic subsystem to the lattice, when the thermal relaxation
rate of the electrons 1/τe , where τe is the relaxation time, matches the
frequency of the precessing M . Notably, this mechanism results in the
same peak-like frequency dependence to the FMR linewidth in Eq.(2.38)
with the characteristic relaxation time τe . In contrast to the slowly relaxing
impurity mechanism, the temperature-dependent peaks in ∆H induced by
the valence exchange mechanism manifests at elevated temperatures in the
range 100 K ≤ T ≤ 400 K [147, 148]. A temperature-dependent study of
∆H ( T ) hence enables to disentangle these two temperature-peak processes.

2.3.4 Magnon-Photon coupling
In the following, we will discuss the two conceptually similar process of
magnon-photon and magnon-phonon coupling. Considering the coupling of two
particular modes of the phonon and magnon system, in a classical description we
can model both modes as two harmonic oscillators with resonance frequencies
f i and loss rates κi coupled to oneanother with the effective coupling rate geff .
If the resonance frequencies of the two resonators are tuned to cross each other
via an external control parameter, they can hybridize and avoid each other in a
characteristic anticrossing feature in the case of strong coupling geff > κ1 , κ2 [30].
Using this simple analogy, we model the magnon-photon coupling between a
magnetically ordered system and a superconducting microwave resonator. This is
illustrated in Fig. 2.6(a). The microwave photons oscillate inside a superconducting
microwave resonator with resonance frequency f r determined by the resonator’s
inductance L and capacitance C at a loss rate κr given as the sum of the internal
and external loss rates κint and κext , respectively. The magnonic excitations of the
ferromagnetic material are resonantly excited at a frequency f mag tunable via an
external magnetic field Hext according to the Kittel equation [Eq. (2.22)] and decay
at a rate of κs proportional to the FMR-linewidth (κs = πγµ0 ∆H). In this system,
the coupling between the magnonic and the phononic subsystem is mediated by
dipolar interaction [30, 78]. Hence, applying an external magnetic field allows to
tune f mag to cross f r to observe magnon-photon coupling. This mechanism has
been extensively studied in different coupling regimes i.e. for various ratios of
geff , κs and κint + κext [30, 149–151].
Using a quantum mechanical description and neglecting dissipative terms, the

24

Chapter 2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics

(a)

(b)

Magnon-photon hybrid

κs

κint

geff

M

M

L

Hext

Magnon-phonon hybrid

κs

Hext

Ferromagnet

un

geff

ηa

Ferromagnet
κext

-dFM

Substrate
0

L

z

Fig. 2.6. – Illustration of the coupling between bosonic excitations and magnonic modes
in coupled resonator/ferromagnet hybrid systems. (a) Schematics of the magnon-photon
coupling. The magnetization precessing with resonance frequency f mag (Kittel mode)
and loss rate κs inductively couples with the effective coupling rate geff to the electromagnetic modes of a superconducting LC-resonator with resonance frequency f r . The
total resonator loss rate is given by the sum of the internal and external loss rates κint
and κext . (b) Schematics of the magnon-phonon coupling. The magnetization precessing
with resonance frequency f mag and loss rate κs couples magnetoelastically with the elastic
modes of the substrate with the effective coupling rate geff . As the substrate can be
viewed as a bulk acoustic wave (BAW) resonator, in particular the coupling to quantized
standing-wave BAW excitations (phonons) with resonance frequency f r is of interest. The
BAW resonator loss rate is given by the acoustic loss rate ηa .

Hamiltonian of the undriven magnon-photon hybrid system can in a rotating
wave approximation be expressed as [65, 78, 152–155]
N
hg
Hcp = h f r a† a + h f mag ∑ bi† bi + eff ( ab† + a† b),
2π {z
| {z }
i =1
}
Resonator
{z
} |
|
Coupling

(2.42)

Magnet

where (a† , a) is the generation and annihilation operators of photons in the
microwave resonator and the operators (b† = 1/geff ∑iN=1 bi† , b = 1/geff ∑iN=1 bi )
describe the creation and
q annihilation of a collective spin excitation. The net

coupling strength geff = ∑iN=1 gi2 normalizes the creation and annihilation operators, where gi is the coupling rate of a microwave photon to a magnetic moment
at lattice site i [155]. For the coupling to excitations in 3d-metals, assume identical coupling rates of photons to all magnetic moments (gi = g0 ) and obtain
√
geff = g0 N. In Eq. (2.42), the first term represents the energy of a microwave
photon in the uncoupled resonator and likewise the second term that of a magnetic excitation in the magnetic sample, where N is the number of spins in the
magnetic sample [30, 78]. The third term describes the coupling between the two
excitations.
In real physical systems, we account for magnetic and microwave loss rates by
introducing the complex resonator frequencies [155, 156] in Eq. (2.42)
f r → f˜r = f r − iκr /(2π), f mag → f˜mag = f mag − iκs /(2π).

2.3

(2.43)

Magnetization dynamics in hybrid systems

25

Furthermore, we add an external drive Hdrive of the form
Hdrive = −ih̄η ( a − a† ),

(2.44)

where η is the coupling rate between microwave resonator and external drive
to Eq. (2.42). By solving the thereby modified Hamiltonian and calculating its
temporal dynamics, we then obtain an analytical expression for the expected
complex transmission parameter T of this system as [78–80]
T( f ) ∝

κext /(2π)
[ g /(2π)]2

eff
i ( f − f r ) − κr /(2π) + i( f − fmag
)+κs /(2π)

.

(2.45)

Following Eq. (2.42), the eigenmodes of the coupled magnon-photon hybrid system
are given by [79]

[i ( f r − f ) + κr /(2π)] · [i ( f mag − f ) + κs /(2π)] = [ geff /(2π)]2 .

(2.46)

We solve Eq. (2.46) by f and obtain the two solutions for the coupled magnonphoton system
f r + f mag
κr + κs
±
f˜mp
=
−i
±
2
4π

s



f r − f mag
κr − κs
−i
2
4π

2

+ ( geff /2π)2 .

(2.47)

The real and imaginary part of Eq. (2.47) represent the resonance position f mp
and linewidth κmp of the hybrid mode, respectively. In the case f i  κi for both
uncoupled magnonic and resonator subsystems, f mp and κmp are given by
q
±
f mp
=
±
κmp

2π

=

f r + f mag
±
2

( f r − f mag )2 + ( geff /π)2
2

,

f r − f mag
κr + κs κr − κs
q
±
.
4π
4π
( f r − f mag )2 + ( geff /π)2

(2.48)

(2.49)

Consequently, we can experimentally study the magnon-photon coupling in our
± and linewidth κ ± of
samples by fitting the measured resonance frequency f mp
mp
the coupled magnon-photon hybrid system to Eqs. (2.48) and (2.49), respectively.

26

Chapter 2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics

2.3.5 Magnon-Phonon coupling
In our experiments, we study magnon-phonon coupling between the fundamental Kittel mode of a ferromagnetic thin film and the elastic standing waves
of a crystalline substrate material serving as a bulk acoustic wave resonator. In
resonance, due to magneto-elastic coupling the homogeneous ferromagnetic resonance mode generates a strain field in the FM with the same frequency and
helicity as the Kittel mode. Due to elastic coupling at the interface to the substrate,
this strain field couples to the BAW resonator modes of the substrate. For the
geometry in our experiments, the BAW modes correspond predominantly to
transverse acoustic shear waves with orthogonal polarizations [112]. As depicted
in Fig. 2.6(b), the propagating shear waves meet reflective boundary conditions
imposed by the finite thickness of the substrate L plus magnetic thin film dFM
and thus we expect the formation of standing waves. For a substrate thickness of
L ≃ 500 µm this corresponds to a mode spacing in the MHz range for transverse
acoustic modes propagating in the substrate with velocities vt ≃ 1 km/s. As we
excite the FMR in the magnetic layer with frequencies in the ≃ 10 GHz range, we
operate this BAW resonator in the high-overtone regime. Here, the resonance
frequency of an elastic standing wave mode with mode number n can be well
approximated by [157]
n
,
(2.50)
fn = 
dFM
2 ṽt + vLt
where dFM is the thickness of the CoFe thin film and ṽt denotes the transverse
phonon velocity of the magnetic thin film. Whenever the frequency of the FMR
is resonant with one of the standing wave modes of the BAW, we can efficiently
excite the elastic mode via magnetoelastic coupling [55, 56, 77, 158, 159]. At these
frequencies we thus expect a modification of the FMR resonance features. Due
to resonance with the acoustic modes at frequencies f n , the FMR absorption line
shows a frequency-periodic modification when measured over a broad frequency
regime [77, 158, 159]. The periodicity is given by the free spectral range f FSR = f 1 .
To determine the net effective coupling rate geff between the transverse elastic
waves and the magnetic Kittel mode, we describe our FM/BAW resonator system
by a circularly polarized elastic wave, which is coupled to the magnetic Kittel
mode. As discussed in detail in Refs. [77, 160] the systems of coupled damped
harmonic resonators can be described via
κs
g
)m+ = eff u+
+ ζh+
2π
4π n
geff +
ηa
m .
( f − f n + i )u+
n =
2π
4π

( f − f mag + i

(2.51)

Here, f mag is the magnetic resonance frequency, the f n is the resonance frequency
of the elastic standing wave using Eq. (2.50) and ηa is the loss rate of the elastic
system. The variables m+ and un+ are the circularly polarized magnetization and

2.3

Magnetization dynamics in hybrid systems

27

elastic wave amplitudes, respectively. Note that in our experiments the chirality of
m and u is given by the oscillating driving field of the CPW h+ , which is coupled
inductively to m+ at the coupling rate ζ. We solve Eq. (2.51) for m+ and obtain
m+ = −ζh+

[ f − f n + iηa ]/(2π)
.
2 / (16π2 )
[ f − f n + iηa /(2π)][ f − f mag + iκs /(2π)] + geff

(2.52)

We can rewrite this expression as
m x,y =

−ζh x,y
,
2 / (16π2 C ( f ))( f − f ) + i · [κ / (2π) + g2 η / (32π3 C ( f ))]
( f − f mag ) − geff
n
s
eff a
(2.53)

where we have defined C ( f ) = ( f − f n )2 + [ηa /(2π)]2 . The imaginary part in the
denominator of Eq. (2.53) can be interpreted as a modified magnetic relaxation
rate κ̃s in the presence of magnetoelastic coupling given by
κ̃s = κs +

2 / (4π2 )
ηa geff
4[( f − f n )2 + ηa2 /(4π2 )]

(2.54)

In resonance with the phononic modes, we obtain
κ̃s ( f = f n ) = κs +

2
geff
4ηa

(2.55)

We see that the magnetic damping is increased by the finite coupling to the
acoustic resonator with damping rate ηa . We solve Eq. (2.55) by the effective
coupling rate geff and obtain
geff = 2

q

ηa (κ̃s ( f = f n ) − κs ) =

q

2ηa γ[µ0 (∆H ( f = f n ) − ∆H0 )].

(2.56)

Hence, in our experiments, the effective coupling rate between Kittel mode and
BAW resonator substrate can be determined from the modification of the FMRlinewidth ∆H at those frequencies, where the Kittel mode is in resonance with
the nth elastic mode of the BAW resonator ( f = f n ).

28

Chapter 2

Phenomenological Description of Magnetization Dynamics

Experimental Details

3

In this Chapter, we present detailed information on the experimental methods
performed in this thesis. Starting with the growth of thin film heterostructures
using magnetron sputter deposition in Ch. 3.1, we proceed with the description of
the nanofabrication of the planar superconducting resonator samples in Ch. 3.2.
Finally, we describe the experimental setup and measurement techniques used for
the characterization of our hybrid samples in Ch. 3.3.

3.1 Thin film deposition process
This section is dedicated to the growth process of thin film multilayers for
the hybrid heterostructures discussed in Chs. 5, 6 and 7. The heterostructures
are deposited by dc magnetron sputtering by using the Superbowl and Ultradisk
sputtering machines of the Walther-Meißner-Institute. As the growth of several
materials has been optimized throughout the course of this thesis (see Refs.
[69, 161–163]), we also provide an overview of the relevant deposition parameters,
which have been optimized to obtain tailored material properties.

3.1.1 Operation principle of magnetron sputtering
In the following, we will briefly describe the growth of metallic thin films for
the heterostructures investigated in this thesis. The following explanations are
based on textbooks on the topic of sputtering deposition from Refs. [164–166].
Sputtering describes the process of removing surface atoms from a target material
by ion bombardment. The dislodged surface atoms move to the substrate surface
and condense there, contributing to the growth of solid thin films on the substrate.
The physical mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 3.1(a). High energy ions with energies
in the ≃ (0.1 − 1) keV-range are accelerated towards the target material, collide
with it in collision cascades [168, 169] leading to the ejection of atoms or even
small material clusters. The number of removed surface atoms depends on the
energy of ions, the relation of their mass to the mass of the target material atoms
for an optimal momentum transfer and on the composition of the target. Ions
with a comparable mass to the target material are required to obtain an optimal
sputtering yield Y, defined as the ratio between the sputtered atoms Na and the
incident ions Ni (Y = Na /Ni ) [167] and a sufficiently low threshold energy Eth for
the onset of the sputtering process [170]. To this end, we utilize an inert Argon
gas, which is ionized and accelerated towards the target by applying a dc voltage
V ≃ 100 V to the target material and an anode ring. This process is illustrated
in Fig. 3.1(b). To allow for sputtering deposition of materials at elevated growth

29

(b)

(a)
Incoming ion
sputtered
surface atom
secondary
electron
Original ion
comes to rest
Collision cascade
inside the target

Radiation heater

Target
Ar

Substrate

Anode
Target

Cathode

Magnets

Fig. 3.1. – (a) Physical mechanism of sputtering. The incident incoming Ar ions cause
a cascade of collisions in the target material that triggers the injection of both surface
atoms and secondary electrons. The schematic sketch was recreated from Fig. 1. in
Ref. [167]. (b) Schematic illustration of the magnetron sputtering process. Ar atoms are
ionized in the electric field applied between anode and cathode and are accelerated
towards the target material igniting a plasma state. The permanent magnets below the
target confine secondary electrons, which increases the ionization efficiency and therefore
the plasma density and deposition rates.

rates on the substrate requires low inert gas pressures to avoid the scattering of
the ejected target particles with the incoming ions and background gas particles.
To this end, we employ magnetron sputtering to trap ejected secondary electrons,
emitted during the ion collision process, in a transversal magnetic field generated
by permanent magnets mounted underneath the target [see Fig. 3.1(b)]. The
transverse magnetic field generated by the magnets exerts a Lorentz force on
the electrons and thereby forces them on a helical path on their way towards
the anode ring [122]. Consequently, the emitted secondary electrons complete
many gyrations and hence traverse a much longer path in the space between the
target material and the anode ring. Thereby the ejected electrons can ionize more
primary ions for sputtering allowing to perform sputter deposition processes at
pressures ≤ 10−2 mbar. As indicated in Fig. 3.1(a), the thin films grown by sputter
deposition are typically polycrystalline consisting of many crystalline or even fully
epitaxial grains rather than a single crystal across the whole substrate. However,
in our deposition systems, the sample can be heated with a radiation heater to
promote textured growth of our thin film and to influence the size of grains.

30

Chapter 3

Experimental Details

3.1.2 Growth optimization parameters
To ensure optimal growth conditions for the desired material, there are several
deposition parameters which need to be optimized:
• Deposition rate rdepo :
The rate at which material is deposited on the substrate is an important
parameter to obtain optimal growth of our thin films. For instance, it impacts
the structural properties of the thin film such as the surface roughness and
crystalline quality but can also have direct influence on the functional properties such as the electrical [171], optical [172] or magnetic [173] characteristics
of the respective materials. The main deposition parameters that allow to
adjust rdepo are: (i) The target-to-substrate distance d, (ii) the deposition
power Pdepo , (iii) the deposition pressure pdepo and (iv) the configuration of
the target with respect to the substrate (face-to-face, off-axis, confocal). As
these parameters can vary strongly for different sputtering machines, the
deposition rate rdepo can be viewed as the most universal parameter, when
comparing deposition recipes of different sputtering machines.
• Process temperature Tdepo : A radiation heater mounted on top of the
manipulator enables to heat the substrates to temperatures of up to 800◦ C
before, during, and after deposition. Target atoms and clusters sputterdeposited on a heated substrate exhibit an enhanced mobility resulting in
the conglomeration of smaller size grains into larger sized structures [174],
which improves the crystalline growth of the material. However, high
deposition temperatures can also break molecular bonds in the deposition
of compounds [175] and give rise to unwanted chemical reactions between
substrate and deposited thin films [137, 176] or between individual materials
in a heterostructures [177].
• Deposition power Pdepo :
In sputter deposition, the deposition power Pdepo used in the sputtering
process also has a profound impact on the sputtering deposition [178, 179]
as it controls either the charge current or voltage applied between anode
and cathode during deposition based on the mode of operation of the power
source. In sputtering deposition, the current at the DC source controls the
number or Ar ions impacting on the target surface and thereby directly
contribute to rdepo , whereas the target voltage governs the respective kinetic
energies of the Ar ions, which influences the average sputter particle size
and kinetic energy and can consequently impact both rdepo and thin film
surface roughness.
In the sputter deposition systems used in this work, the used DC power
supplies of the Superbowls sputtering system are operated in the constant
power mode, whereas those of the Ultradisk sputtering system are operated

3.1 Thin film deposition process

31

in the constant current mode. In the constant current mode, the deposition
power is increased by increasing the sputtering current of the magnetron
target, proportional to the gas ion current on the target surface. Furthermore,
we know from our deposition runs in the Superbowls sputtering system,
that raising the deposition power primarily increases the deposition current.
Therefore in our growth optimization processes in both sputtering chambers,
Pdepo predominantly controls the number of Ar ions impacting on the target
surface thereby contribute to rdepo but not the respective kinetic energies of
the Ar ions, which influences the average sputter particle size and kinetic
energy.
• Deposition pressure pdepo and target-substrate distance d:
The inert gas pressure during deposition pdepo affects the mean free path l
of the particles ejected from the target material surface. In combination with
the target-sample distance d, this enables to control the size S of the particle
complexes sputtered on the sample surface as l is inversely proportional
to S [180]. The deposition of smaller particle complexes can improve the
surface roughness of the deposited films [181].
• Target configuration:
The sputtering devices used for this work allow for two different target
configurations with respect to the substrate: The face-to-face(ftf)- and the
tilt-in(ti)-configuration. As the name suggests, in the ftf-configuration, the
target and magnetron are aligned in a confocal orientation. Hence, the
target material impact on the substrate surface at a right angle traversing a
minimum distance d and thereby transferring the maximum kinetic energy
on the substrate material at the maximum deposition rate rdepo . As outlined
previously, a high deposition rate can be advantageous for certain materials,
however, it is detrimental to the smoothness of the substrate/material interface and gives rise to a higher surface roughness compared to a deposition
at an angle β [182, 183] in the ti-configuration. Likewise to a deposition at an
elevated target-substrate distance d, particles sputtered from a target at an
angle traverse a longer path before reaching the sample surface and thereby
inflict less damage on the substrate surface.
• Ratio of inert and reactive gas flow in reactive sputtering processes x: The
deposition compound materials like oxides or nitrides from an elemental
target require the injection of a reactive gas in addition to the inert gas during
sputtering. The reactive gas forms radicals in the ion plasma, which react
with the sputtered target material to form the desired compound [165]. To
enable the growth at the desired stochiometric composition in the deposited
compound material, the ideal gas flow ratio of inert and reactive gas needs
to be determined. Furthermore, in reactive sputtering processes, hysteretic

32

Chapter 3

Experimental Details

behavior in the target voltage due the free radicals of the reactive gas reacting
with both the ejected target particles as well as the target itself need to be
accounted for [161, 162, 184–186].

3.1.3 Superbowls sputtering cluster
The UHV Sputter Utensil Performing Everything Required for Best, Optimized,
World Leading Samples (Superbowls) by Bestec enables to fabricate complex multilayer heterostructures made from both ferromagnetic and superconducting materials. Here, the spatial separation of superconducting and ferromagnetic target
materials in the SP2- and SP4-chamber allows to minimize cross-contamination
of the targets. The Superbowls deposition cluster is depicted in Fig. 3.2(a). For
superconductor/ferromagnet-heterostructures with clean interfaces, an in-situ
transfer of the sample from one chamber to the other via the Loadlock is possible.
The SP2 chamber contains two 3”-magnetrons and one 2”-magnetron. Two magnetrons can be tilted into a to a confocal configuration to enable the simultaneous
deposition from up to three targets. To clean samples before deposition, the
SP2-chamber also contains an Ar-ion milling source. The SP4 chamber consists
of eight tillable 2”-magnetrons, which are aligned in two confocal deposition
clusters allowing to deposit an alloy comprising of up to four materials and can
be operated both with a dc and a rf power source. Both chambers have a high
purity Argon- and a Nitrogen-gas inlet to enable reactive sputtering deposition.

3.1.4 Ultradisk sputtering system
Besides the Superbowls sputtering cluster, the second UHV sputtering system
used in this work is the Unlimited Legendary Tool for Reliable Achievements in
the Deposition of Integrated Superconducting Komponents (Ultradisk) by Mantis
schematically illustrated in Fig. 3.2(b). Intended for the deposition of superconducting materials on areas of up to 4” in diameter for wafer-size superconducting
quantum circuits, this deposition chamber comprises of six clusters with a total of
eleven magnetrons, which can be operated both with a dc and a rf power source.
The clusters one, three and five each contain one 4”-inch target, whereas the
clusters two four and six allow for a tilted deposition to enable material alloying.
Like the Superbowls system, the Ultradisk is equipped with an Ar ion milling
gun for substrate cleaning as well as gas inlets for both argon and nitrogen gas
for reactive sputtering.

3.1 Thin film deposition process

33

(a)

Non-Ferromagnet Chamber (NFC, SP2)

Loadlock

All-Ferromagnet Chamber (AFC, SP4)

1

4

2

1
3

8

2

1: Ar-/reac�ve-ion source
2 & 3: 3” magnetrons
4: 2” magnetron

1 - 8: 2” magnetrons

Deposition Clusters:
1,3,5: 4” magnetron
2: 3” magnetron cluster
4: 2” magnetron cluster
6: cluster for ion-assisted deposition

turbo pump
with throttle valve

(b)
residual gas analysis

4
load lock
with linear transfer

7

3
4
5
6

5
6

3
2

ion source

1
circular movement:
center of substrate holder

Fig. 3.2. – Sketch of the Superbowls (a) and Ultradisk (b) sputtering systems. Adapted
from Refs. [185](a) and [186](b).

3.1.5 Advantages and disadvantages of the Superbowls and
Ultradisk sputtering systems
Depending on the task at hand, both sputtering systems have their unique
strengths and weaknesses. Hence, they were used for the different topics discussed
in this thesis. The Superbowls cluster is optimally suited for the in-situ deposition
of multilayer structures of both superconducting and ferromagnetic materials
and was hence used for the deposition of the SC/FM-heterostructures in Ch. 5.
On the other hand, the ability to fabricate many samples in a single deposition
run by using a 4”-target and the absence of ferromagnetic impurities render the
Ultradisk advantageous for the fabrication of high quality NbTiN thin films for
superconducting resonators in Sec. 6. Finally for the study of magnon-phonon
coupling in Ch. 7 the require magnetic thin films were deposited in the Superbowls
system. A comprehensive overview of the main advantages and disadvantages of
the two sputtering systems is given in Tab. 3.1.

34

Chapter 3

Experimental Details

Advantages:

Disadvantages:

Superbowls
-Larger deposition rates due
to lower ddepo
-Growth of Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures
possible
-Potential FM contaminants

Ultradisk
-No FM contaminants
-Fabrication of many samples
in a single deposition run
-No FM materials

Tab. 3.1. – Advantages and disadvantages of the Superbowl- and Ultradisk sputtering
systems.

resist
spin coating
bakeout
base dose
post-bakeout
developer
development time
etching gas ratio
rf power
gas pressure
etching time
wait time
remover
removal time

EBL process parameters
CSAR 6200.18
8000 rpm, 1 min
150°C, 1 min
2.2 C m−2
130°C, 1 min
AR 600-546
60 sec
RIE process parameters
20 SF6/7.2 Ar
100 W
2 × 10−2 mbar
2 × 65 s
7 min in an Ar-atmosphere
Resist removal
AR 600-71
2 min

Tab. 3.2. – Summary of the EBL process-, RIE- and resist removal parameters for the
fabrication of superconducting NbTiN resonators grown on Si substrates.

3.2 Sample patterning techniques
The magnon-photon coupling experiments in Ch. 5 require NbTiN thin films
grown on Si substrates, which are patterned into superconducting resonators via
electron beam lithography (EBL), subsequent reactive ion etching (RIE) and finally
the removal of the resist layer. The resist processing parameters for these process
steps are listed in Tab. 3.2.
In the following, we will detail the procedure for each step:
• EBL process:
The NbTiN thin film samples are first cleaned in acetone and isopropanol
(IPA) in an ultrasonic bath. Afterwards, they are spin coated with a resist
layer and baked on a hotplate to reduce the concentration of solvent in the

3.2 Sample patterning techniques

35

resist mask. The resist exposure is performed with the NanoBeam nB5 system
from NanoBeam Ltd., which is operated at a beam voltage of 80 kV using the
lowest available beam current of ≃2.2 nA to obtain the best possible feature
accuracy. Thereafter, a hard bake is performed to improve the durability of
the resist for the reactive ion etching process. As a final step, we develop
the resist in the suitable chemical solution. We use a positive resist and
hence the exposed areas of the resist are removed by the developer, while
the the unexposed areas remain almost unaffected. After the desired time,
the developing reaction is stopped by rinsing the sample twice in IPA. The
desired resonator layout has hereby been transferred to the resist layer.
• RIE process:
To remove the NbTiN from the exposed areas of the patterned sample,
we perform a RIE process using a Plasmalab 80 Plus system from Oxford
Instruments with a reactive plasma of a mixture of SF6 and Ar gas. The
etching process is split into two identical etching steps to avoid overheating
of the sample and the crosslinking of the resist layer. Between the two
etching steps, the sample is cooled in a pure Ar-atmosphere.
• Resist removal:
Finally, after etching the NbTiN from the exposed areas, the protective resist
layer is removed in the ultrasonic bath using a suitable remover chemical.
Like the resist development step, the removal process is stopped by rinsing
the sample twice in IPA.
The resonator layout used in this work is
shown in Fig. 3.3. NbTiN thin films with a layer
wTL
thickness of d = 150 nm are grown on Si substrates using reactive dc magnetron sputtering
ws
l
in a mixed Ar/N2 -atmosphere with a gas flow
ratio of 36.2/3.8, a deposition temperature of
Tdepo = 500 ◦ C, a pressure of pdepo = 5 µbar,
200 µm
L
C
and a deposition power of P = 95 W using a
Fig. 3.3. – Illustration of the 4” Nb70 Ti30 target. These thin films are then patsuperconducting resonator lay- terned into capacitively shunted planar meanderout used in this thesis. Adapted
type resonators consisting of an interdigitated finfrom Ref. [70].
ger capacitor with capacitance C (red) shunting
a meandering inductor with inductance L (blue). The individual fingers have
a length of l = 720 µm and a width of ws = 15 µm. These dimensions are the
result of a resonator characterization series in Ref. [186], where the geometry
of the fabricated resonators was varied. The investigated chip layout includes
a microwave transmission line patterned at a distance wTL = 40 µm from all
resonators , which is coupled to the multiple lumped element resonators (LER)

36

Chapter 3

Experimental Details

each with a different capacitance C to shift their resonance frequencies f r . This
configuration allows for a multiplexed readout scheme of the resonator quality
factors Q.

3.3 Experimental procedure
The main experimental techniques performed in this work are broadband
ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy and the performance characterization of
planar superconducting resonators. The details of these techniques are outlined
in the following.

3.3.1 Cryogenic ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy
The general experimental setup for cryogenic broadband ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy (bbFMR) consists of three main components: A superconducting magnet cryostat, a vector network analyzer (VNA) and a coplanar waveguide
(CPW). A schematic illustration of the experimental setup is shown in Fig. 3.4(a).
The sample is placed face-down on a coplanar waveguide (CPW) on a copper
holder at the end of a RF measurement dipstick. Both ends of the CPW are
attached to microwave cables in the dipstick which are in turn connected to a
broadband microwave source, in this case a vector network analyzer (VNA) [see
Fig. 3.4(b)]. Additional DC wires for a temperature sensor and a resistive heater
allow to control the sample temperature. The dipstick is then placed in the variable temperature insert (VTI) of a superconducting magnet cryostat as illustrated
in Fig. 3.4(a). The liquid helium cryostat utilizes the flow of liquid helium through
an adjustable needle valve to cool the sample space in the pumped VTI enabling
temperatures in the range (2 K ≤ T ≤ 300 K). Three different superconducting
magnet cryostat have been used for the experiments performed in this thesis (the
magnetic field geometry is defined with respect to the coordinate system given in
Fig. 3.4(b)):
1. The Chaos cryostat, a 3D-vector magnet consisting of three superconducting
Helmholtz coils reaching magnetic field strengths of up to µ0 Hext = 2.5 T in
the b-c-plane and up to µ0 Hext = 6 T in the a-direction. This cryostat was
used for the BBFMR-experiments in chapters 4 and 5.
2. The Moria cryostat, a superconducting split coil with a field strength of up to
µ0 Hext = 7 T with the possibility to rotate the sample in the b-c-plane via an
electronic stepper motor. Due to its capability to apply large magnetic fields
in the vertical direction c, it was used to characterize the magnetoelastic
coupling of CoFe thin films to bulk acoustic resonances in the substrate
crystal in Ch. 7.

3.3

Experimental procedure

37

(a)

(b)
VNA
dipstick
c

Magnet

sam

c

OOP

nd

pl

an

ple

CC
wc

ch

HIP

e

w

un

pl

hrf

Port 2

needle valve

M

m
Sa

He, 4.2 K

dla

dFM

copper holder
with sample

Port 1

En

l

variable temperature insert

4

b

a

ro
u

Cryostat control
- Temperature
- Magnetic field

e

dipstick control
- Temperature

G

vacuum
pump

ate
str
Sub

IP

Hext

Fig. 3.4. – (a) Schematic illustration of the measurement setup for BBFMR at cryogenic
temperatures. The dipstick is inserted into the variable temperature insert (VTI), where
the sample temperature can be varied between 2 K and 300 K. The external magnetic field
Hext is created by superconducting (vector) magnets inside the helium tank. Adapted
from Ref. [187]. (b) Sample holder mounted at the end of the dipstick. The sample is
placed face-down on a CPW, which is in turn connected to the ports of a vector network
analyzer via microwave cables attached to the endlaunch connectors. A microwave signal
generated by the VNA is coupled into the center conductor, where it induces an oscillating
magnetic field hrf , which drives the magnetization within the sample. Adapted from
Ref. [120].

3. The 17T cryostat, a superconducting solenoid capable of large field strengths
of up to µ0 H = 17 T along the a-direction. This setup has been primarily
used for the characterization of superconducting resonators in Ch. 5.
In this thesis, the magnetization dynamics of our hybrid thin film devices are
characterized by performing broadband ferromagnetic resonance spectroscopy,
which allows to study magnetization dynamics of thin film samples > 1 nm over
a large bandwidth of frequencies ≃ 50 GHz [82]. Here, the thin film sample is
placed face-down on a CPW as illustrated in Fig. 3.4(b). The electromagnetic wave
propagates along the CPW. Due to the interaction of the associated rf magnetic
field with the sample placed on top of the CPW, a frequency-dependent change
of the transmission and reflection coefficient of the CPW is induced, which can
be measured by a VNA. By measuring the complex scattering parameters Sij (i,
j=1,2) as a function of frequency, all parameters determining the FMR signal can
be deduced. A vector network analyzer is used as the broadband microwave
source and detector. In our experiments, the used Keysight N5225B VNA is capable
to generate and detect microwave signals in the range (10 MHz ≤ f ≤ 50 GHz).
Additionally, the usage of VNA’s allows for the phase sensitive study of the FMR

38

Chapter 3

Experimental Details

and thereby to obtain information on field- and damping-like spin-orbit torques
(SOT) by employing the inductive analysis technique outlined in Ref. [84] as done
in Ch. 5. In our experiments, the ferromagnetic resonance in the magnetic layer is
excited by a microwave signal generated at port 1 of the VNA and coupled into
the CC of the CPW with a width of wcc ≃60 µm via microwave cables mounted
on the dipstick, which are attached to the endlaunch connectors on the sample
holder. The thereby generated dynamic magnetic driving field hrf in the b-c-plane
can be approximated by modeling the CC as a rectangular slab using the Karlqvist
equations [188]





b + w2cc
b − w2cc
1
hb (b, c, t) = h0 (t) arctan
− arctan
π
c
c
!
wcc 2
2
(b + 2 ) + c
1
.
h0 (t) ln
hc (b, c, t) =
2π
(b − w2cc )2 + c2

(3.1)

Here h0 (t) = I (t)/2wcc is the dynamics field amplitude at the center of the CC
(b = c = 0). The generated oscillating magnetic field drives the precession of
the sample’s magnetization M . In resonance due to Faraday’s law, M induces
a dynamic voltage Vind driving currents, which oppose the microwave driving
currents. This process leads to the absorption of microwave power, which is
detected in the transmitting signal entering port 2 of the VNA. The voltage
induced in the CPW is given by
Vind = −

∂Φ(t)
,
∂t

(3.2)

where the dynamic magnetic flux Φ(t) is induced from the precessing magnetization M (t) of our thin film sample driven by the dynamic driving field hrf (t).
Hence, an analytic expression for Φ(t) can be obtained by using Eq. (3.1), the definition M (t) = χ̂p hrf (t) from Eq. (2.19) and integrating over the sample volume
on top of the CC V 0 [92]
ZZZ

µ0
hrf (b, c, t)χ̂p hrf (b, c, t)dadbdc
I (t)
V0
ZZ
µ0 l
=
h2 (b, c, t)χbb (1 − δbH ) + h2c (b, c, t)χcc (1 − δcH )dbdc,
I ( t ) A0 b

Φ(t) =

(3.3)

where l is the sample length on top of the CC and A0 the sample area above it. We
account for the different measurement geometries with the Kronecker delta terms
δiH = 1 for i k Hext (i = a, b, c) and δiH = 0 for i ⊥ Hext (i.e. only the driving
field components, which are perpendicular to Hext can drive the magnetization
dynamics and contribute to the dynamic flux). Note, that in Eq. (3.3) we can
neglect the odd term in hb due to symmetry. In the thin film limit dFM  wcc , we
can simplify Eq. (3.3) by using hb,c (b, c) = hb,c (b, 0). Furthermore, we assume that
the width wsample of the sample is large compared to that of the CC (wsample  wcc )

3.3

Experimental procedure

39

and integrate from −∞ to ∞ in the b-direction. Under these assumptions, the
dynamic flux Φ(t) simplifies to [92]
Φ ( t ) = µ0 I ( t )

ldFM
[χ (1 − δbH ) + χcc (1 − δcH )].
4wcc bb

(3.4)

The magnetic flux Φ is related to the inductance L0 = Φ(t)/I (t), which quantifies
the mutual inductive coupling between sample and CPW1 . It is given by
L0 = µ0

ldFM
[χ (1 − δbH ) + χcc (1 − δcH )].
4wcc bb

(3.5)

Having quantified the inductive coupling between thin film sample and CPW,
we now describe, how to detect L in our bbFMR experiments using a VNA. The
complex transmission parameter S21 recorded by port 2 of the VNA is defined as
S21 =

V2
|V2 | i(φ2 −φ1 )
=
e
,
V1
|V1 |

(3.6)

where Vi are the measured complex voltages with magnitude |Vi | and phase φi of
0 caused by microwave- and
the respective port i. It consists of the background S21
cable-losses from the setup, which are modeled as a complex linear function of
0 = A + B · H , where A and B are complex constants, to account for
the form S21
ext
the magnetic-field dependence of these losses and a change of transmission ∆S21
caused by the FMR of the sample in resonance.
∆S21 =

0
S21 − S21
,
S21

(3.7)

The inductive coupling between sample and CPW gives rise to contribution i2π f L0
in series to the impedance Z0 = 50 Ω of the empty CPW. In a voltage-divider
model, the net change in transmission of the loaded CPW can be expressed as [189]
∆S21 =

1 −i2π f L0
iπ f L0
≈−
,
2 Z0 − i2π f L0
Z0

(3.8)

under the assumption 2π f L0  Z0 , which is valid in our case ( f ≃ 50 GHz and
L0 ≃ 10−15 H). In Eq. (3.8), the factor 1/2 is required, as the complex voltage V2 is
measured between CPW and port 2 and not between port 1 and port 2.

1 In literature, a mutual inductance is commonly denoted with the variable M. However, to avoid

confusion with the sample magnetization and to be consistent with the formalism outlined in
Refs. [83, 84], we denote the mutual inductive coupling between sample and CPW with L0 .

40

Chapter 3

Experimental Details

Using Eqs. (3.8) and (3.7), we obtain a general expression for S21 ( f , Hext )
0
0
S21 ( f , Hext ) = S21
( f )(1 + ∆S21 ) = S21
(f) ·
0
= S21
(f)




1−e

iφ iπ f L0



Z0

π f µ0 ldFM iφ
e [χbb ( f , Hext )(1 − δbH ) + χcc ( f , Hext )(1 − δcH )]
1−i
4Z0 wcc



0
= S21
( f ) − iAeiφ [χbb ( f , Hext )(1 − δbH ) + χcc ( f , Hext )(1 − δcH )].

(3.9)
Here, we have introduced the constant A = π f µ0 ldFM /(4Z0 wcc ), which comprises
all the geometrical and setup parameters and a phase shift in the microwave
signal by φ, that accounts for the phase change of the signal when traversing the
microwave circuit
Depending on the orientation of the CC along a with respect to the external
magnetic field Hext , we can differentiate between three measurement geometries
for bbFMR:
• Hext k a (ip):
In the case Hext k a, the coordinate system in Fig. 3.4 can be mapped onto
the one in the schematic depiction of the FMR in Fig. 2.2 via a → z, b → y
and c → x. Here, using the generalized expression for the components of
χˆp from Eq. (2.30), S21 ( f , Hext ) takes the following form
0
S21 ( f , Hext ) = S21
( f ) − iAeiφ [χyy ( f , Hext ) + χ xx ( f , Hext )]


1
0
iφ
.
= S21 ( f ) + Ae χyx ( f , Hext ) e +
e

(3.10)

As apparent from Eq. (3.10), both driving field components hrf,b and hrf,c
contribute to the magnetization dynamics giving rise to an enhanced signal
magnitude in ∆S21 , which renders this ip-configuration of particular interest
to characterize magnetic thin films.
• Hext k b (ip):
ForHext k b, the coordinate system mapping between our measurement and
FMR toy model is a → x, b → z and c → y. Consequently, Eq. (3.9) can be
simplified to
0
S21 ( f , Hext ) = S21
( f ) − iAeiφ χyy ( f , Hext )

1
0
= S21
( f ) + Aeiφ χyx ( f , Hext ) .
e

(3.11)

We note, that this ip-configuration is undesirable for the characterization of
magnetic thin films with a high Ms as the large ellipticity (e  1, f  0)

3.3

Experimental procedure

41

will strongly reduce the detected signal magnitude in the VNA [note, that in
Eq. (2.31), e > 1 for Nxx = Nzz = 0, Nyy = 1 (thin film limit) and Hu  Ms ].
• Hext k c (oop):
Finally, for the oop-configuration, we can map the coordinate systems of
our measurement setup and FMR toy model via a → x, b → y and c → z.
Consequently, Eq. (3.12) takes the form
0
S21 ( f , Hext ) = S21
( f ) − iAeiφ χ xx ( f , Hext )
0
= S21
( f ) + Aeiφ χyx ( f , Hext )e.

(3.12)

Note, that in general in our experiments, we can assume a circular magnetization precession with e = 1 in our thin films [note, that in Eq. (2.31), e ≈ 1
for Nxx = Nyy = 0, Nzz = 1 (thin film limit) and Hu  Ms ].
The magnetization dynamics of our hybrid thin films is hence studied by recording S21 in magnetic resonance for a broad range of frequencies and fitting it to
either Eq. (3.10), (3.11) or (3.12) depending on the direction of the applied external
field Hext and thereby extracting the resonance field Hres ( f ) and linewidth ∆H ( f ),
which are in turn fitted to Eq. (2.26) or (2.24) depending on the measurement geometry and Eq. (2.28), respectively. There are two different experimental approaches
to conduct bbFMR: The ”field-swept”-mode, where a fixed VNA-frequency f is
applied [continuous wave mode (CW)] and S21 is recorded with a fine magnetic
field resolution, while sweeping Hext through Hres or in the ”frequency-swept”mode by recording S21 with a fine frequency resolution around f res at a fixed
Hext . Unless otherwise stated, the experiments in this thesis are performed in the
”field”-swept mode with a high resolution in Hext rather than f , as for the low
FMR signal magnitudes of magnetic thin films, a low IF-bandwidth [IFBW] of the
VNA is required to reliable detect the FMR, meaning a ”frequency-swept”-mode
with a high resolution in frequency would be too time-consuming. Moreover, for
most FMR investigations only a very rough frequency resolution over a broad
frequency range is needed.

3.3.2 Characterization of superconducting resonators
The superconducting lumped element resonators fabricated in this work can
be viewed as a LC-circuit with capacitance C and inductance L as shown in the
electrical schematic in Fig. 3.5(a) and the layout shown in Fig. 3.3. The resonance
frequency is defined as [190, 191]
fr =

1
√

2π LC

.

(3.13)

In our used layout (see Fig. 3.3), L and C are chosen corresponding to a resonance
frequency of f r ≃ 5 GHz.

42

Chapter 3

Experimental Details

(a)

(b)

-25

κint
L

|S21| (dB)

κext

C

-30

-1.0

0.0

1.0

f-fr (MHz)

Fig. 3.5. – (a) Electrical schematic of a lumped element resonator. The LC circuit is
capacitively coupled to the microwave feedline. The loss rates κext and κint quantify the
external and internal loss rates of the resonator. Adapted from Ref. [190]. Exemplary
resonance feature in the microwave transmission spectrum |S21 ( f )| of a single resonator
fabricated from NbTiN grown on Si and measured at T = 2.2 K at a microwave power
corresponding to the high power regime. The red continuous line indicates a fit to the
data using Eq. (3.18).

The performance of a resonator is characterized by the quality factor Q,
which is defined as 2π× the ratio of the energy stored in the electromagnetic
mode Etot and the energy lost per cycle Ploss /ωr given by the total loss rate κr of
the resonator [190, 191]. Hence it can be expressed as2
Q=

Etot
π fr
ωr
=
=
.
Ploss /ωr
κr
2κr

(3.14)

As is apparent from the electrical schematic in Fig. 3.3, the total loss rate κr is the
sum of the external losses κext from the environment (i.e. the microwave strip
line) and the internal losses κint induced by quasiparticle excitations [192, 193], the
coupling of the resonator to two-level systems (TLS) [194–196] as well as from
resistive, dielectric or radiative losses [197]
κr = κext + κint .

(3.15)

κext and κint are related to the internal and external quality factor via
Qint =

π fr
π fr
, Qext =
.
κint
κext

(3.16)

2 Noe, that we here define κ as half width at half maximum (HWHM) of the resonator. Hence, we
r
ωr
define Q = 2κ
. In literature, κr is sometimes also defined as the full width at half maximum
r
(FWHM) resulting in the definition Q = ωκrr .

3.3

Experimental procedure

43

The total quality factor Q can hence be rewritten as

Q=

1
1
+
Qext
Qint

 −1
.

(3.17)

The microwave resonators fabricated in this work are typically operated in the
critically coupled regime (Qint ≃ Qext ) [197] to allow for the characterization of our
resonator performance using the ’circle fit method’ [198]. To this end, the finalized
chips are mounted on a gold plated oxygen free high thermal conductivity copper
sample box and inserted into a variable temperature insert in a liquid helium
cryostat or into the mK sample stage of a He3/He4 dilution fridge. The two
ends of the central feed line are then connected to the two ports of a VNA. We
then record the complex transmission parameter S21 ( f ) close to their respective
resonance frequencies f r . The superconducting resonators are charcterized in
terms of their quality factors by fitting the recorded S21 ( f )-spectra with the ’circle
fit method’ [198] using

( Q/| Qext |) eiφ
.
S21 ( f ) = |ae e{z } 1 −
1 + 2iQ ( f / f r − 1)
environment |
{z
}
iβ −2πi f τ



(3.18)

ideal resonator

The prefactors in front of the square brackets account for the attenuation and
phase shifts attributed to the microwave circuit. Specifically, the attenuation is
given by the constant a, the phase shift by β, and the electrical delay due to
the finite length of the wiring by τ. The expression within the square brackets
describes the response of the resonator itself, including an additional correction
eiφ to account for potential asymmetries induced by spurious input- and output
impedance or standing waves. We note that expanding Qext to the complex plane
allows one to account for differences in impedance between the resonator and the
feedline. In addition, f and f r denote the VNA driving frequency and resonator
resonance frequency, respectively.
Exemplary raw data for |S21 ( f )| of a NbTiN resonator in resonance is shown
in Fig. 3.5(b). The resonator is fabricated from NbTiN deposited on a highly
resistive Si substrate and is measured at T = 2.2 K at a microwave power corresponding to the high power regime. The red continuous line indicates a fit
to the data via the ’circle fit method’ using Eq. (3.18). We extract a resonance
frequency of f r = 4.924 GHz as well as the quality factors Q = (84.3 ± 0.6) · 103 ,
Qint = (207.8 ± 3.8) · 103 and Qext = (141.9 ± 0.1) · 103 .
Two principle setups have been used for the characterization of our superconducting microwave resonators:
• For the statistical analysis of our resonators as well as for the experiments performed at elevated temperatures (2.2 K ≤ T ≤ 13 K) and external magnetic
fields (0 mT ≤ µ0 Hext ≤ 500 mT), our mounted resonators were installed

44

Chapter 3

Experimental Details

(b)

(a)
VNA

VNA

RT

RT

-10
dB

-30
dB

µ0Hext
sample
-20
dB

2.2 K-300 K

+32
dB

50 K

-10
dB

+40
dB

-6
dB

4K
1K

-20
dB

sample
-40
dB

0.1 K
<7 mK

Fig. 3.6. – (a) Schematic of the microwave circuit of the measurement setup. The green
arrow indicates the direction of the applied in-plane magnetic field µ0 Hext . (b) Microwave
setup for experiments at mK temperatures.

in the VTI of a liquid helium magnet cryostat (see Sec. 3.3.1). Fig. 3.6(a)
schematically depicts the microwave transmission setup employed for these
experiments. To reduce room temperature thermal noise, the input signal is
attenuated by 30 dB close to the SMA connector of the sample box. At the
output connector, we use a 20 dB attenuator to suppress the formation of
standing waves as well as a cryogenic HEMT amplifier (gain: +32 dB).

• For the mK experiments, we used a Bluefors LD-400 dry dilution refrigerator.
The used microwave circuitry is depicted in Fig. 3.6(b). To suppress room
temperature noise photons from reaching the sample under investigation,
the incoming signal is attenuated by a set of attenuators on the various
temperature stages. On the output side, we use a cryogenic circulator
mounted on the mK stage to suppress the formation of standing waves. The
outgoing signal is then amplified by +40 dB by a cryogenic HEMT amplifier
mounted at the 4 K stage. For this setup, we measure ≈ 10 dB cable losses
from the microwave cables at f ≃ 5 GHz.

3.3

Experimental procedure

45

Slowly relaxing impurities in
maghemite thin films

4

Magnetic insulators, where magnons carry spin information, are the basis for
the implementation of logic circuits using angular momentum transport [199]
in the emerging fields of magnonics [25, 26], spin-caloritronics [200], and spinorbitronics [201]. The most commonly used material platform in all of these
research fields is yttrium iron garnet (Y3Fe5O12, YIG), particularly because its low
Gilbert damping α ≃ 10−5 [141, 202, 203] is the key parameter for the implementation of spin-wave-based devices, as it allows for the generation of spin waves
with propagation lengths up to the millimeter regime and at frequencies ranging
from the GHz to the THz regime [204, 205]. However, apart from its exceptional
damping properties, YIG has major drawbacks regarding its integration into more
complex heterogeneous magnonic devices as it requires high deposition and annealing temperatures and paramagnetic gadolinium gallium garnet (Gd3Ga5O12)
substrates for its optimal growth, rendering alternative magnetic insulators with
low Gilbert damping desirable. To this end, an emergent material platform are
ferrites with a spinel structure such as nickel ferrite (NFO, NiFe2 O4 ) [206], nickel
zinc aluminum ferrite (NiZnAlFO, Ni0.65 Zn0.35 Al0.8 Fe1.2 O4 ) [207], magnesium aluminum ferrite (MAFO, MgAl0.5 Fe1.5 O4 ) [208] and aluminum-doped ferrites (FAO,
γ-Fe2−x Alx O3 ) [209]. They are both compatible with conventional substrate materials such as MgO and exhibit a low Gilbert damping α ≃ 10−3 in the bulk
limit [206, 208]. The desire for alternative insulating magnetic materials to YIG
has motivated us to characterize the room-temperature ferrimagnetic insulator,
namely spinel-type ferrite γ-Fe2O3 (maghemite), in terms of its epitaxial growth
as well as static and dynamic magnetic properties. The growth of high-quality
γ-Fe2O3 thin films is challenging as this phase is metastable and tends to easily
transform into antiferromagnetic hematite (α-Fe2O3), which is the equilibrium
phase above 350◦ C [210, 211]. To obtain pure γ-Fe2O3, we deposit our thin films in
the presence of epitaxial strain on MgO substrates using pulsed laser deposition
(PLD). We then confirm the good crystalline quality and coherently strained
growth of our thin films by performing high-resolution x-ray diffraction (HRXRD). Furthermore, we study the static magnetic properties of our samples via
SQUID magnetometry. Finally, we investigate the dynamic magnetic properties
of our thin film samples via cryogenic bbFMR (see Sec. 3.3.1). In these experiments, we detect a small negative effective magnetization Meff , providing further
evidence for the presence of a strain-induced perpendicular magnetic anisotropy
in our samples. The presence of a sizable PMA at room-temperature renders
γ-Fe2O3 particularly desirable for both spintronics applications [212, 213] and for

47

all-electrical magnon transport experiments [106, 199, 214, 215] as the PMA has
been found to reduce non-viscous contributions to damping (see Sec. 2.2). Here,
the thin film deposition via pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and characterization
via HR-XRD have been done by Monika Scheufele in the course of her Master’s
thesis [216], whereas the author has performed the SQUID magnetometry and
cryogenic bbFMR experiments as well as the data analysis procedure of the FMR
data.
Regarding the temperature dependence of Meff ( T ), we observe a sign change
from negative to positive values with decreasing temperature, which indicates a
transition of the magnetic anisotropy in our maghemite thin films from an oop
easy-axis to an in-plane (ip) easy-plane orientation. Furthermore, we also observe
a non-linear behavior in the FMR linewidth ∆H ( f ) as a function of the microwave
frequency f , which can be well interpreted in terms of the temperature-dependent
magnetic relaxation process (see Sec. 2.3.3) induced by Fe2+ -impurities in our thin
films.
This chapter is organized as follows: In Sec. 4.1, we discuss the crystalline
structure of γ-Fe2O3. Thereafter we describe the growth and structural characterization of our thin films in Section 4.2. In Section 4.3 we then focus on the
static and dynamic magnetic properties of our γ-Fe2O3 films before discussing
the presence of the non-linear damping mechanisms present in our γ-Fe2O3 in
Section 4.4. Finally, in Section 4.5 we summarize our key findings.
The γ -Fe2O3 thin films, which are investigated in this chapter, have been
grown via pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and characterized via HR-XRD by
Monika Scheufele in the course of her Master’s thesis [216].
The main results presented in this chapter are published in
M. Müller, M. Scheufele, J. Gückelhorn, L. Flacke, M. Weiler, H. Huebl, S. Geprägs,
R. Gross, M. Althammer, Reduced effective magnetization and damping by slowly
relaxing impurities in strained γ -Fe2O3 thin films, Journal of Applied Physics 132,
233905 (2022) [67].

4.1 Physical properties of γ-Fe2O3
The physical properties of various iron oxide phases have been described in
Refs. [95, 216]. Here, we briefly summarize the relevant magnetic properties of
γ-Fe2O3 found in these references.
Depending on the degree of Fe vacancy disorder, γ-Fe2O3 can crystallize either
into a cubic lattice or a tetragonal inverse spinel superstructure with c ≃ 3a [217],
where a ≃ 0.833 nm [218] is the ip lattice constant and c is the oop lattice constant.
The crystal lattice of γ-Fe2O3 is shown in Fig. 4.1. The Fe3+ ions (green spheres
in Fig. 4.1) are located on octahedral and tetrahedral sites and are surrounded by
O2− ions (blue spheres in Fig. 4.1) [216]. In the tetragonal state, Fe3+ vacancies
(large bright green spheres in Fig. 4.1) show an ordered arrangement on one

48

Chapter 4

Slowly relaxing impurities in maghemite thin films

vacancies
(octahedral sites)

Fe3+ (octahedral
& tetrahedral sites)
O2-

Fig. 4.1. – Tetragonal unit cell of γ-Fe2 O3 . Fe3+ ions are represented as green spheres,
O2− as blue spheres and vacancies by the larger green semitransparent spheres. The oop
lattice constant c is three times the ip lattice constant a. In case of disordered vacancy
sites, γ-Fe2 O3 appears in a cubic structure (unit cell indicated by black lines). Taken from
Ref. [216].

particular octahedral lattice site, whereas in the cubic state, they are randomly
distributed on the octahedral sites in the crystal [219]. The unit cell of the cubic
+
1/3 )B O24− , where 
lattice comprises eight formula units of the form Fe3A+ (Fe35/3
denotes the vacancies, the index A the tetrahedral and the index B the octahedral
sites [216, 220]. Therefore, the vacancy sites reduce the net positive charge per
unit cell and thereby give rise to charge neutrality in γ-Fe2 O3 . The Fe3+ -ions with
net spin quantum number S = 5/2 on the octahedral and tetrahedral lattice sites
interact with each other and form two magnetic sublattices, which in turn couple
in an antiparallel configuration. As more tetrahedral sites A than octahedral
sites B are occupied by Fe3+ -ions, the resulting magnetic order in γ-Fe2O3 is
ferrimagnetic with a Curie temperature of Tc = 950 K [221] and an expected net
magnetization of µ0 Ms ≃ 0.5 T at room temperature [95, 222].

4.2 Thin film deposition and structural
characterization
The γ-Fe2O3 thin films investigated in this study are grown via pulsed laser
deposition on MgO (001) substrates at a deposition temperature of Tdepo = 320 ◦ C,
a pure oxygen pressure of pO2 = 25 µbar, a laser fluence at the stochiometric,
polycrystalline α-Fe2O3 target of ρL = 2.5 J/cm2 and a laser pulse repetition
frequency of f = 2 Hz resulting in a growth rate of r =≃ 0.3 nm/s. Due to the
lattice mismatch between the substrate and the thin film, the pseudomorphically
grown γ-Fe2O3 thin films exhibit tensile strain within the film plane. In our

4.2 Thin film deposition and structural characterization

49

103

γ-Fe2O3

102
101
100
10

30

300

I (cps)

I (cps)

104

γ-Fe2O3 (004) MgO (002)

(a)

105

α-Fe2O3 (0006)

106

superstructure reflection
γ-Fe2O3 (004)

experiments, we study two maghemite thin films of different thickness (45.0 nm
and 52.6 nm) but comparable static and dynamic magnetic properties. Since the
larger layer thickness of the latter thin film allowed for a better signal-to-noise
ratio in the cryogenic bbFMR experiments, we only present the dynamic magnetic
properties of the thicker film in the main text and show those of the thinner film
in the Appendix A. To determine the phase, in which our thin films are grown, we
perform a wide range 2θ − ω x-ray diffraction scan on the 45.0 nm thick γ-Fe2O3
film. The resulting XRD intensity I as a function of the detector angle 2θ is plotted
in Fig. 4.2(a). We observe reflection peaks in intensity from the spinel γ-Fe2O3
(b)

200
FWHM=0.019°

100

50

21.45

21.50

2 (°)

103
102

q00L (rlu)

104

I (cps)

4.06

(c)

γ-Fe2O3
(004)

105

MgO (002)

106

101

21.60

(d)

4.04
4.02

γ-Fe2O3 (408)

MgO (204)

4.00

100
10-1
42

21.55
(°)

43

44

1.998

2 (°)

2.000

2.002

qH00 (rlu)

Fig. 4.2. – (a) Wide range 2θ − ω x-ray diffraction scan of the 45.0 nm thick γ-Fe2O3 film
grown on a (001) oriented MgO substrate. We observe crystalline reflections from the
spinel γ-Fe2O3 (004) structure as well as the (002)-reflection from MgO. No superstructure
from the tetragonal phase of γ-Fe2O3 nor reflections from undesired iron oxide impurity
phases such as hematite (α-Fe2O3) are visible (gray dashed lines indicate their expected
positions). The blue dashed lines indicate the 2θ range plotted in panel (c). (b) Rocking
curve of the γ-Fe2O3 (004)-reflection. The red line indicates a Gaussian fit to the raw data.
We extract a narrow full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of FWHM= (0.0194 ± 0.0002)◦ .
(c) Zoom in on the overview 2θ − ω XRD scan in panel (a). Laue oscillations of the γFe2O3 (004)-reflection are visible (blue arrows). (d) Reciprocal space mapping around the
asymmetrical MgO (204) and γ-Fe2O3 (408) reflections. The units are given in reciprocal
lattice units (rlu) with respect to the MgO substrate. From the thin film reflection at
qH00 = 1.99998 rlu and q00L = 4.0463 rlu, we determine an epitaxial strain of exx = 1.1%
in the film plane and ezz = −0.05% out of the film plane.

(004) phase as well as from the (002)-reflection of the MgO substrate. However, we

50

Chapter 4

Slowly relaxing impurities in maghemite thin films

observe no superstructure reflection from the tetragonal phase of γ-Fe2O3 nor from
additional iron oxide phases such as hematite [see gray dashed lines in Fig. 4.2(a)].
The blue dashed lines indicate the range of angles for the x-ray diffraction data
plotted in Fig. 4.2(c). From Fig. 4.2(a), we infer that in our thin films the γ-Fe2O3
unit cell grows in the cubic phase on four MgO unit cells resulting in an expected
bulk
bulk
lattice mismatch of e = (2abulk
MgO − aγ−Fe O ) /2aMgO = 1.1 % using the bulk lattice
2

3

bulk
constants abulk
γ−Fe2O3 = 0.8332 nm [218] and aMgO = 0.4212 nm [223]. In Fig. 4.2(b),

we show the extracted rocking curve of the γ-Fe2O3(004)-reflection to a Gaussian fit
and extract a full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of FWHM= (0.0194 ± 0.0002)◦ ,
which demonstrates a good crystalline growth. Fig. 4.2(c) depicts a zoomed-in
view of the 2θ-ω scan in panel (a). We observe Laue oscillations (blue arrows)
around the (004)-reflection of γ-Fe2O3, indicating the coherent growth of γ-Fe2O3
on MgO (001). From the 2θ position of the γ-Fe2O3(004) reflection at 2θ = 43.44◦ ,
we calculate the oop lattice constant to c = 0.8327 nm.
In order to also determine the ip lattice constant aγ−Fe2O3 of our thin films,
a reciprocal space mapping around the maghemite (408) reflection is performed
and shown in Fig. 4.2(b). We observe the (408) reflection of γ-Fe2O3 at qH00 =
1.99998 reciprocal lattice units (rlu) and q00L = 4.0463 rlu, yielding the lattice
constants aγ−Fe2O3 = 0.8423 nm and cγ−Fe2O3 = 0.8326 nm. The latter is in excellent agreement with the value extracted from the position of the (004) γ-Fe2O3reflection in panel (c). From the measured in-plane lattice constant we derive
an epitaxial strain in the thin film plane of exx = 1.1%, in agreement with our
naive initial assumption using the bulk lattice constants of MgO and γ-Fe2O3.
This observation indicates that our thin films are fully epitaxially strained. The
out-of-plane strain is determined to ezz = −0.05%. This value is significantly
lower than expected under the naive assumption that maghemite exhibits the same
Poisson ratio as hematite (ν ≈ 0.12) [224], which would result in an oop-strain
of ezz = −2exx /(1 − ν) = −2.5 %. As our γ-Fe2O3 thin films exclusively show
crystalline reflections from the cubic phase, we expect the Fe3+ vacancies in our
γ-Fe2O3 thin films to be randomly distributed throughout our thin films [217]
and hence do not alter the oop-strain. Therefore, we attribute the unexpectedly
low out-of-plane strain and the correspondingly large increase of the unit cell
volume of ∆V/V ≃ 1.0 % to an oxygen deficiency in our maghemite thin films.The
oxygen deficiency results from the fact that the film can significantly reduce the
lattice strain and hence the elastic energy by incorporating less oxygen. Regarding existing literature, in Ref. [225], a comparable change in lattice constant for
the spinel ferrrite NiFe2 O4−δ has been observed and could be correlated to an
oxygen deficiency of δ = 0.0355. Consequently, we assume a comparable oxygen
deficiency for our γ-Fe2O3 thin films.
As a further probe for the pure and singular growth of the γ-Fe2O3 phase in
our samples, we measure the temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity

4.2 Thin film deposition and structural characterization

51

ρ on our unpatterned thin films using the Van-der-Pauw method [226]. The
resulting ρ( T ) for the 45.0 nm thick γ-Fe2O3 thin film is plotted in Fig. 4.3(a).
1 0 4

(T )

0 .6
0 .4

M o r in

V e rw e y

1 0 3

µ 0M

r

( Ωm )

(a )

(b )

0 .2
0

1 0 0

2 0 0

3 0 0

T (K )

Fig. 4.3. – (a) Temperature dependence of the electrical resistivity ρ of a 45.0 nm thick
γ-Fe2O3 sample. Below T = 155 K, the resistivity of the investigated film exceeds the
range of our measurement scheme. Hence, below T = 155 K, ρ is above the detection
limit. (b) Temperature dependence of the magnetization M of the same film measured at
an external field of µ0 Hext = 0.5 T. The film was previously cooled in a magnetic field of 7
T to saturate its magnetization. The increase of the magnetization below 50 K is caused by
paramagnetic impurities within the MgO substrate. The brown dashed lines mark the
temperatures of the Morin and Verwey transition in α-Fe2O3 and Fe3O4, respectively.

We observe a smooth evolution with temperature in the sample resistivity
ρ( T ) and no evidence for the Morin phase transition [227] (T = 263 K) from the
undesired hematite (α-Fe2O3)-phase. Due to the good insulating properties of our
samples, the thin film resistivity for T < 155 K exceeds the experimental detection
limit. Hence, using this method we cannot probe for the presence of magnetite
(Fe3O4) as the temperature of its phase transition, called the Verwey transition [228],
is at T = 120 K. As an alternative probe, we measure the magnetization M of our
sample at an external magnetic field µ0 Hext = 0.5 T applied within the film plane
via SQUID magnetometry. The resulting M( T ) is plotted in Fig. 4.3(b). We observe
a smooth evolution in M( T ) throughout the entire investigated temperature
range from T = 5 K to T = 300 K and in particular, no abrupt changes at the
temperatures of the Morin- and Verwey transition as indicated by the dark red
dashed lines. The observed strong increase in M ( T ) for temperatures T < 50 K
can be attributed to the magnetic response of paramagnetic impurities within the
MgO substrate. To summarize the results of our XRD and transport experiments,
we demonstrate the growth of single-phase γ-Fe2O3 thin films of highly crystalline
quality. However, the reduced oop-strain ezz indicates a finite density of oxygen
vacancies, which will be important for discussing the magnetization dynamics of
our γ-Fe2O3 thin films in the subsequent section 4.3.

52

Chapter 4

Slowly relaxing impurities in maghemite thin films

4.3 Magnetic properties of maghemite thin films
4.3.1 Static magnetic properties
To characterize the static magnetic properties of our samples, we measure
magnetic hysteresis M( Hext ) curves via SQUID magnetometry with the external
magnetic field Hext applied both in ip- and oop-direction. The resulting hysteresis
curves of the 45.0 nm thick maghemite sample are shown in Fig. 4.4 for the ip
(black circles) and oop (red circles) geometry.
(a )

(b )

0 .2
ip
(T )

o o p

µ 0M

0 .0
µ 0M

-0 .2
-2

0
µ 0H

e x t ( T

)

2

-0 .1

s =

0 .2 6 2 T

0 .0
µ 0H

e x t ( T

0 .1
)

Fig. 4.4. – (a) Room-temperature magnetization as function of applied magnetic field
curves recorded via SQUID magnetometry for γ-Fe2O3 thin films measured in ip (black)
and oop (red) geometry. (b) Zoomed-in view of the magnetic hysteresis curve shown in
(a) for the field range −0.1 T ≤ µ0 Hext ≤ 0.1 T. The horizontal, gray dashed lines mark
the saturation magnetization of µ0 Ms = 0.262 T.

Here, we have subtracted a diamagnetic linear background contribution to
M from the MgO substrate. In panel (a), we plot the whole examined magnetic
field range −3 T ≤ µ0 Hext ≤ 3 T, whereas in panel (b), we show a magnified view
of the field range −0.1 T ≤ µ0 Hext ≤ 0.1 T. Notably, we observe in panel (b) a
hysteretic behavior in M ( H ) in both ip and oop geometry. Along the magnetic
hard axis in the oop-geometry, we attribute the observed magnetic hysteresis
in M ( Hext ) to the pinning of domain walls induced by the presence of a finite
density of so-called antiphase boundaries (APBs) [206, 229, 230] in our γ-Fe2O3
thin films. APBs are formed, when crystalline regions with different symmetry
merge and couple antiferromagnetically during film growth [231,232]. This causes
domain wall pinning and thus a large external magnetic field is required to align
the orientation of all of the individual magnetic domains along the magnetic field
direction (cf. Ref. [233]). Notably, APBs are commonly observed in iron oxide
thin films with spinel crystal symmetry [206, 234]. In our SQUID magnetometry
measurements the contribution of APBs to M is difficult to quantify, as it can be
masked by the diamagnetic contribution from the MgO substrate at large Hext .
For the saturation magnetization, we extract µ0 Ms = 0.262 T, which is only
about half of the expected bulk value from literature µ0 Ms ≃ 0.5 T [95, 222].

4.3 Magnetic properties of maghemite thin films

53

However, the saturation magnetization of γ-Fe2O3 thin films has been found
to sensitively depend on the fabrication method and the thin film quality. As
an example, reduced values of Ms have been reported for γ-Fe2O3 thin films
grown on MgO substrates via molecular beam epitaxy (µ0 Ms = 0.339 T) [229].
Likewise to the hysteretic magnetic behavior in oop-geometry, we attribute the
strongly reduced Ms in our thin films to the pinning of domain walls by antiphase
boundaries.

4.3.2 Dynamic magnetic properties
To study the dynamic magnetic properties of our γ-Fe2O3 samples, we perform cryogenic bbFMR experiments (see Sec. 3.3.1). For the bbFMR experiments
in this chapter, we record the complex microwave transmission parameter S21 for
fixed microwave frequencies in the range 5 GHz ≤ f ≤ 43.5 GHz as a function
of the static applied magnetic field Hext in the oop geometry [see Fig. 3.4(a)] to
suppress two-magnon scattering [114–116] using a VNA. Exemplary raw data for
the recorded net change in the complex transmission parameter ∆S21 induced by
the FMR in γ-Fe2O3 at T = 300 K and f = 15 GHz is shown in Fig. 4.5 for the real
(a) and imaginary part (b). The data is calculated from the raw S21 data using
Eq. (3.7) as a function of external magnetic field Hext . The complex ∆S21 data is
fitted to the Polder susceptibility χˆp [continuous lines in panels (a) and (b)] via
Eq. (2.30) to extract the resonance field Hext [blue dashed line in panels (a) and
(b)] and the linewidth ∆H [light blue box in panels (a) and (b)] as a function of f .
The resulting FMR field and linewidth evolution Hres ( f ) and ∆H ( f ) is plotted in
Fig. 4.5(c) and (d), respectively.
For the FMR linewidth ∆H ( f ) in Fig. 4.5(d), we observe a non-linear ∆H ( f )
dependence showing a distinct cusp feature in the intermediate frequency range
(10 GHz ≤ f ≤ 20 GHz). A cusp-feature ∆H ( f ) indicates the presence of one or
multiple temperature-dependent magnetic relaxation processes in our γ-Fe2O3
thin films, where a peak-like feature in ∆H ( f ) can manifest, when energy is
resonantly transferred from the dynamically precessing magnetization to the
lattice (see Sec. 2.3.3).
In the following, we interpret this feature in ∆H ( f ) as caused by the slowlyrelaxing impurity mechanism. From energy-dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS)
experiments performed on our samples shown in Appendix A1, we observe no
traces of any impurity contamination in our thin films. However, an alternative
plausible candidate are unpaired Fe2+ -ions [147, 235–237] caused by the oxygen
deficiency in our samples (see Sec. 4.2). Indeed, a finite concentration of Fe2+ -ions
in γ-Fe2O3 nanocrystals has been observed via x-ray absorption spectroscopy
in Ref. [219]. In the presence of slowly relaxing impurities and assuming a
uniform uniaxial out-of-plane anisotropy field Hu , the total dispersion of the
ferromagnetic resonance and the change of linewidth with frequency in oop-

54

Chapter 4

Slowly relaxing impurities in maghemite thin films

(a )

(b )

0 .2

µ 0H

0 .0

I m ( ∆S 2 1 )

R e ( ∆S 2 1 )

0 .2

re s

f = 1 5 G H z

-0 .2

-0 .2
0 .5 1

µ 0 ∆H

0 .0

0 .5 1

0 .5 4

µ 0H

e x t ( T

0 .5 4

µ 0H
)

e x t ( T

)

6 0

1 .5

(c )

(d )

(m T )

1 .0

0 .5

K i

l
tte

E q

2
. (

.3

7 )

4 0

µ 0 ∆H

µ 0H

re s

(T )

E q . (2 .3 8 )

0 .0

a m
G ilb e r t d

2 0
(e )

(f)

(m T )

(α

)

s lo w

s lo w

(m T )

∝Im

0

∝ R e ( αs l o w )

2 0

µ 0 ∆H

s lo w
re s

µ 0H

p in g

-1 0

1 0

0
0

1 0

2 0
f (G H z )

3 0

4 0

0

1 0

2 0

3 0

4 0

f (G H z )

Fig. 4.5. – Exemplary raw and processed data for the room temperature oop bbFMR
experiment of the 52.6 nm thick γ-Fe2O3 thin film. (a) and (b) depict raw data for the
real and imaginary part of ∆S21 as function of Hext at f = 15 GHz. The continuous
lines represent fits to the Polder susceptibility, whereas the dashed line and colored box
represent the resonance field Hres and linewidth ∆H, respectively. (c) Extracted resonance
field Hres together with a fit following Eq. (2.37) (red line). The inset displays an apparent
small difference between the linear Kittel contribution (blue line) and the total fit (red
line). (d) Raw data of the extracted resonance linewidth ∆H together with a fit following
Eq. (2.38) (red line). The linear-in-frequency term in Eq. (2.38) is the Gilbert damping (blue
slow obtained
line). (e) Slowly relaxing impurity contribution to the resonance field Hres
by subtracting the Kittel contribution (blue line) from the raw data for Hres in panel (c)
together with a fit to Im(αslow ) according to Eq. (2.39) (green line). (f) Slowly relaxing
impurity contribution to the resonance linewidth ∆H slow ( f ) extracted by subtracting the
linear Gilbert contribution (blue line) from the raw data for ∆H in panel (d) together with
a fit to Re(αslow )( f ) according to Eq. (2.39) (green line).

4.3 Magnetic properties of maghemite thin films

55

geometry is given by Eqs.(2.37) and (2.38), where we account for the slow-relaxor
mechanism via the additional contribution ∝ αslow to Hres and ∆H, which is
defined in Eq. (2.39). The continuous red lines in Fig. 4.5(c) and (d) represent a
simultaneous fit to Eqs. (2.37) and (2.38) including the slowly relaxing impurity
parameters, whereas the blue continuous lines represent the background to Hres
and ∆H in the absence of the slow-relaxor mechanism. In Fig. 4.5(e) and (f),
we plot the extracted isolated slow-relaxor contribution to the FMR resonance
field and linewidth as function of f . Here, the green lines represent the real and
imaginary part of αslow following Eq. (2.39). While the imaginary part of αslow ( f )
in Fig. 4.5(c) only weakly modifies the FMR resonance frequency and could be
misinterpreted as a modified g-factor, the real part of αslow ( f ), shown in Fig. 4.5(d),
can qualitatively reproduce the cusp-feature in the FMR linewidth. We account for
the slight impact of the slow-relaxor mechanism on Hres ( f ) by performing a global
fit for both Hres ( f ) and ∆H ( f ) using the same shared parameters. Here, we use a
temperature-independent g-factor g = 2.022, which matches previous results for
maghemite nanopowders [238], to reduce the number of free fitting parameters.
The fitted magnetization dynamics and parameters describing the slowly relaxing
impurities for the fit to the data presented in Fig. 4.5 are µ0 Meff = (−12.4 ± 2.1) mT,
α = (2.2 ± 1.5) · 10−3 , CF ( T ) = (2.9 ± 0.6) GHz and τ = (6.3 ± 2.5) ps. These
values also represent the room-temperature data points in the Fig. 4.6. Notably, we
fit a low negative effective magnetization Meff , which indicates a dominant oop
easy-axis anisotropy with µ0 Hu < µ0 Ms ≈ 0.3 T for our maghemite thin films. We
attribute the observed large Hu despite the relatively low oop strain (ezz = −0.05%,
see Sec. 4.2), to the presence of a strong magnetoelastic coupling, which is common
for epitaxial spinel ferrite thin films [207,239,240]. In the Appendix A2, we present
additional room temperature FMR-results of three different γ-Fe2O3 thin films.
For the magnetization dynamics in all of these films, we observe a comparable
behavior to the data displayed in Fig. 4.5 with a reduced effective magnetization
and non-linear behavior in ∆H as function of frequency. This indicates an universal
origin of the observed strain induced magnetic anisotropy and the slowly relaxing
impurity contribution to the resonance linewidth.
In Fig. 4.6, we present the magnetization dynamics and slow-relaxor parameters of the 52.6 nm thick maghemite thin film. The data is obtained by
fitting the Hres and ∆H values derived from our bbFMR experiments using
Eqs. (2.37) and (2.38) as a function of temperature T. In panel (a), we observe
a small negative effective magnetization µ0 Meff ≈ −12 mT at room temperature, which gradually increases with decreasing temperature and changes sign
at Tcross ≈ 200 K [brown dashed line in Fig. 4.6(a)]. We attribute the strong
temperature-dependence and sign change in Meff to be governed by the reduction in the strain-induced anisotropy contribution Hu due to the reduced strain
between MgO and γ-Fe2O3 with decreasing temperature. We note, that this reduction in strain is expected from literature, as iron oxides exhibit a larger thermal

56

Chapter 4

Slowly relaxing impurities in maghemite thin films

(b )

( 1 0 -3 )

3 0

T c ro s s

4

µ 0M

a

e ff

(m T )

8

(a )

6 0

0
3 0
(c )

C F (T ) (G H z )

6

(d )

1 5

t

(p s )

4

2

0
0
0

1 0 0

2 0 0
T (K )

3 0 0
0

1 0 0

2 0 0

3 0 0

T (K )

Fig. 4.6. – Magnetization dynamics- and slowly relaxing impurity parameters of the
52.6 nm thick maghemite sample as a function of temperature T. (a) Effective magnetization Meff and (b) Gilbert damping parameter α as function of T. (c) Magnitude of slowly relaxing impurity contribution CF ( T ) together with a theoretical fitting curve for CF ( T ) (red
line) following the product of Eqs. (2.40) and (2.41). We extract Eslow = (0.50 ± 0.04) meV
and C · T = (66 ± 4) GHz·K. (d) Relaxation time τ as function of T. The red line represents
a fit to Eq. (4.1). We extract EA = (3.3 ± 0.6) meV and τ0 = (19.9 ± 0.1) ps.

expansion coefficient [241] compared to that of MgO [242]. In parallel to a change
in interfacial strain, the saturation magnetization Ms of maghemite increases with
decreasing temperature [243] and contributes to the observed rise in µ0 Meff with
decreasing T . However, from the low change in magnitude with reduced T in
Ref. [243][Ms (300 K) ≈ 0.9Ms (0 K)], we expect this contribution to be too small
to single-handedly describe the observed increase in Meff ( T ) in panel (a). For the
temperature-dependence of the Gilbert damping, plotted in Fig. 4.6(b), we observe
a light but continuous increase in α with decreasing temperatures. In the same
way as the Gilbert damping of the 45.0 nm thick γ-Fe2O3 thin film presented in the
Appendix A2, the increase in α with decreasing temperatures coincides with the
sign change in Meff . This correspondence indicates that the change in anisotropy
from easy-axis to easy-plane in our samples enhances the Gilbert damping in
our γ-Fe2O3 thin films. Regarding the characteristic parameters of the slowly
relaxing impurities in Fig. 4.6(c), we observe a maximum in CF ( T ) at T ≃ 7 K
followed by a decrease in magnitude for CF ( T ) with rising temperatures up to
T = 150 K. Surprisingly, for higher T, the magnitude of CF ( T ) increases again and
this trend continues up to room temperature. The observed peak-behavior at low
T is characteristic for temperature-dependent magnetic relaxation processes (see
Sec. 2.3.3). Furthermore, we observe a good agreement for the experimental data

4.3 Magnetic properties of maghemite thin films

57

of CF ( T ) in Fig. 4.6(c) with a fit to the product of Eqs. (2.40) and (2.41) (red line) for
low temperatures (T ≤ 50 K). From this fit, we obtain the slow-relaxor parameters
Eslow = (0.50 ± 0.04) meV and C · T = (66 ± 4) GHz·K, which are comparable to
values reported in previous publications on slowly relaxing impurities [82, 244].
A potential mechanism to explain the increase in CF ( T ) for T > 150 K is the
valence-exchange mechanism (see Sec. 2.3.3) as will be discussed in detail in the
following Section 4.4. Finally, for the temperature-dependence of the relaxation
time τ in Fig. 4.6(d), we observe a constant τ for elevated temperatures T > 100 K
and a strong increase in τ below 100 K. Assuming the predominant relaxation
of the slowly relaxing impurities via a single particle Orbach process [245] with
activation energy EA , we fit the extracted τ for temperatures below 100 K using

τ = τ0 · tanh

EA
2kB T


.

(4.1)

From the resulting fit [red line in Fig. 4.6(d)], we obtain EA = (3.3 ± 0.6) meV
and τ0 = (19.9 ± 0.1) ps, which correspond well to the slow-relaxor excitation
energies in Refs. [244, 246]. For elevated temperatures, we observe a deviation
between fitting curve and raw data in Fig. 4.6(d) due to the increasing impact of
Raman- and two-quasiparticle Orbach processes [245, 247], which exhibit different
temperature dependencies than that of single-particle Orbach processes in Eq. (4.1).
In the Appendix A1, the fitting results for τ of Fig. 4.6(d) are compared to those
of the 45 nm thick maghemite film, where we observe a comparable magnitude
and evolution with temperature for both CF ( T ) and τ and thereby confirm that
the temperature dependence of the magnetization dynamics and slow relaxor
parameters in Fig. 4.6 are representative for our γ-Fe2O3 thin films.

4.4 Discussion of the non-linear magnetic damping
In the previous data, we have found that the magnetization dynamics of our
γ-Fe2O3 thin films can be well described with the slowly-relaxing impurity mechanism for low temperatures T ≤50 K and assume a valence-exchange mechanism
to manifest at higher temperatures. However, there are various variety of other
non-linear magnetization damping mechanisms, which we will discuss in the
following and provide arguments for why we can rule them out in our γ-Fe2O3
thin films.
We begin our discussion with the magnetization damping caused by the
scattering of the uniform magnetization mode (k = 0) with optical phonons
according to the Kasuya-LeCraw-mechanism [248, 249] or with optical magnons
as described by the Kolokolov-L’vov-Cherepanov process [202]. However, these
processes give rise to a contribution to the FMR-linewidth that is approximately
linear in frequency and temperature for intermediate temperatures (150 K ≤ T ≤
350 K) [203] and can hence not explain the observed non-linear features in FMR

58

Chapter 4

Slowly relaxing impurities in maghemite thin films

linewidth ∆H at elevated temperatures [see Fig. 4.6(c)]. Similarly, a non-linear
damping contribution can arise due to two-magnon scattering [114–116]. However,
this process does not exhibit a strong temperature dependence [74,249] and is also
expected to be suppressed in oop-geometry. Hence, we assume the contribution
of two-magnon scattering to the damping to be negligible for our samples.
As an alternative explanation for the non-linear frequency dependence of
∆H in our experiments, damping effects induced by the perpendicular magnetic
anisotropy may play a role. In this context, a non-linear ∆H ( f ) dependence
can be induced by a non-collinear distribution of uniaxial anisotropies with
an average angle β around the out-of-plane direction. This scenario has been
described with the so-called anisotropy dispersion model by Krysztofik et al. in
Ref. [250]. However, in contrast to our results, they observe a convex shape for
the ∆H ( f ) dependence of strained YIG on yttrium aluminum garnet (Y3Al5O12,
YAG) substrates with a negative slope in ∆H ( f ), such that we can also rule out
an angular distribution in magnetic anisotropies around the sample normal as the
origin of the non-linear ∆H ( f ) dependence in the high-temperature regime.
Finally, we note that there exists a temperature-dependent magnetic relaxation
process that gives rise to a non-linear evolution in ∆H ( f ) at elevated temperatures
(100 K ≤ T ≤ 400 K [147, 148]), namely the so-called valence-exchange or chargetransfer mechanism [74,147,148]. As detailed in Sec. 2.3.3, this effect manifests itself
if mixed-valent ions are present in the ferromagnetic thin film (i.e. Fe2+ or Fe4+
ions in YIG with nominal only Fe3+ -ions). In this case, electrons can hop between
the different valence lattice site and thereby mediate a net energy transfer from the
dynamically precessing magnetization to the crystal lattice, which increases the
magnetization damping. Notably, this mechanism results in the same peak-like
frequency dependence to the FMR linewidth [147] ∆Hct ∝ ωτct /[1 + (ωτct )2 ] as
predicted by the slowly relaxing impurity model [see Eq. (2.39)]. However, it
exhibits a different characteristic timescale τct , representing the electron hopping
time. Fortunately, its impact on the FMR-linewidth can be distinguished from that
of slowly relaxing impurities, as it has been found to manifest itself at temperatures
above room temperature, for example, above T ≃ 370 K in YIG [147, 236]. In our
γ-Fe2O3 samples, the electron hopping mechanism would then take place between
the Fe3+ -ions and the unpaired Fe2+ -ions induced by the oxygen deficiency.
To discuss the impact of the valence-exchange mechanism on the magnetization damping of our γ-Fe2O3 thin films, we plot in Fig. 4.7 the FMR linewidth
∆H recorded at f = 15 GHz for the 52.6 nm thick maghemite film as function
of temperature T. The red dashed line represents the slowly relaxing impurity
contribution to the FMR linewidth following the real part of Eq.(2.39) together
with a theory curve (red line) using the fitted parameters to CF ( T ) and τ from
Fig. 4.6(c) and (d). In the low temperature regime (T < 50 K), the peak-like feature
in Fig. 4.7 can be well described by our slowly relaxing impurity model, while the
gradual increase in ∆H at elevated temperatures mirrors our observations for the

4.4

Discussion of the non-linear magnetic damping

59

5 0

µ 0 ∆H

(m T )

f= 1 5 G H z

3 0
0

1 0 0

2 0 0

3 0 0

T (K )

Fig. 4.7. – FMR linewidth ∆H recorded at f = 15 GHz of the 52.6 nm thick maghemite
film as a function of temperature T. The red dashed line represents the slowly relaxing
impurity contribution to the FMR linewidth following the real part of Eq. (2.39) using the
extracted fitting parameters from fits to CF ( T ) and τ in Fig. 4.6(c) and (d).

slowly relaxing impurity constant CF ( T ) in Fig. 4.6(c). This correspondence indicates that the increase in ∆H is generated by a non-linear magnetization damping
contribution [see also the decrease in α with rising T in Fig. 4.6(b)]. Furthermore,
it is worth mentioning that the increase in FMR linewidth at T > 150 K coincides
with a decrease in sample resistivity ρ [see Fig. 4.3(a)] and thereby with the increased thermally induced hopping probability of the electrons available for the
valence-exchange mechanism. Based on these experimental hints, we suspect that
the observed increase in FMR linewidth ∆H and slowly-relaxing impurity constant
CF ( T ) at higher temperatures T > 100 K up to room temperature originates from
the valence-exchange mechanism caused by electron hopping between Fe2+ and
Fe3+ ions in γ-Fe2O3. We do not observe the characteristic temperature peak in
∆H for the valence-exchange model, as we have performed FMR measurements
only up to room temperature in our thin films.

4.5 Summary and Outlook
In this chapter, we investigate the static and dynamic magnetic properties of
epitaxially strained γ-Fe2O3 thin films grown on MgO substrates by performing
SQUID magnetometry and temperature dependent bbFMR experiments. XRD
measurements demonstrate the pseudomorphic growth of γ-Fe2O3 with a tensile
in-plane epitaxial strain of exx = 1.1% and an unexpectedly small out-of-plane
strain of ezz = −0.05%. The latter suggests an oxygen deficiency in our samples.
Room temperature SQUID magnetometry experiments show hysteretic magnetization curves for the magnetic field applied in both the ip and oop direction
with a saturation magnetization of µ0 Ms = 0.262 T, which is only about half of
the literature value µ0 Ms ≃ 0.5 T for bulk material [222, 251]. This indicates the
presence of a sizable density of antiphase boundaries. Regarding the magnetization dynamics, we find that the conventional Gilbert damping mechanism

60

Chapter 4

Slowly relaxing impurities in maghemite thin films

including an inhomogeneous linewidth broadening is not sufficient to describe
the observed non-linear frequency dependence of the FMR linewidth ∆H ( f ). We
model the observed peak in ∆H ( f ) by accounting for the coupling of the sample
magnetization with an ensemble of paramagnetic impurities using the so-called
slow-relaxor model. Here, the presence of a finite density of Fe2+ ions is the
most plausible candidate for the impurities [147, 235–237]. This is in agreement
with the observed increased unit cell of our samples. To characterize the slowrelaxing impurity mechanism in our samples, we then study the magnetization
dynamics and parameters describing the slowly relaxing impurities as a function
of temperature by performing cryogenic bbFMR(see Sec. 3.3.1). For the effective
magnetization Meff ( T ), we find a crossover from an oop easy-axis to an ip easyplane anisotropy, which we attribute to the reduced strain in γ-Fe2O3 on MgO
for reduced temperatures. Regarding the slowly relaxing impurity contribution,
we observe the predicted temperature-dependent magnetic relaxation behavior
at low T. Furthermore, for elevated temperatures (T > 150 K), we measure an
unexpected increase of the linewidth with increasing temperature, which is induced by a non-linear magnetization damping process. We attribute this increase
to electrons hopping between Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions in our oxygen-deficient films,
which gives rise to an additional temperature-dependent magnetic relaxation
process called the valence-exchange mechanism.
Our thorough characterization of the slowly-relaxing impurity mechanism as
function of temperature and frequency in γ-Fe2O3 provides input for the theoretical understanding of magnetization damping induced by the magnetic coupling to
slowly relaxing impurities. The controlled non-linear magnetization damping is of
interest for magnetization damping engineering of magnetic materials for example
to enhance the magnetic damping for magnetic sensor applications [82]. Moreover,
the observed PMA in maghemite is of interest for energy efficient data storage
devices based on magnetic textures such as magnetic bubbles, chiral domain walls,
and magnetic skyrmions [212, 213]. Finally, the strain-induced near-zero effective
magnetization of maghemite renders it a promising material platform for future
magnonics applications of magnetically ordered insulators [106, 199, 214, 215].

4.5 Summary and Outlook

61

Spin torques in
Superconductor/Ferromagnet
heterostructures

5

In the last chapter, we have investigated the impact of the coupling of the magnetization of a magnetic thin film to a disordered ensemble of paramagnetic impurities
and its effect on the magnetization dynamics. On a more general level it is interesting to ask the question, how the magnetization dynamics in magnetic thin films is
affected by the interaction with the excitations of adjacent solid state phases, such
as for example topological phases [65, 66, 252], charge ordered phases [253–255]
or superconductivity [49, 256, 257]. Using the Superbowls sputtering machine
(see Sec. 3.1.5), we are able fabricate heterostructures consisting of magnetically
ordered materials and materials showing various other ordering phenomena. This
allows us to realize systems where the magnetization dynamics is coupled to
excitation of other solid-state phases. In this chapter, we address the question how
the magnetization dynamics in magnetic thin films is affected by coupling it to an
adjacent superconducting film.
In the following, we will provide a rough overview of selected aspects of
superconductivity, which are relevant for the interpretation of the presented results. A more detailed discussion on this phenomenon can be found for example
in Refs. [86, 258–260]. Superconductivity describes a macroscopic quantum phenomenon leading to zero electrical resistance and perfect diamagnetism below a
superconducting transition temperature Tc . Superconducting materials are thus
capable of carrying large persistent electric charge currents without measurable
resistance. This has enabled their technical application in high-field superconducting magnets used for example in magnetic resonance imaging [261, 262] and tapes
used for efficient energy transmission applications [263–265].
In simple terms, superconductivity is mediated by an attractive interaction
of electrons via the virtual exchange of phonons. In this simple picture [86], an
electron moving in a superconducting material attracts the positively charged ions
from the underlying material lattice. This elastic distortion of the lattice gives rise
to a localized positive potential well, which survives for a finite time τ given by
the inverse of the characteristic phonon frequency ωD of the material. In turn, this
leads to a retarded attractive interaction for a second nearby electron and hence
to an attractive electron-electron interaction. Due to a maximum overlap of the
momentum states in the reciprocal space [86], the retarded interaction mechanism
favors -in the simplest case- the pairing of electrons with opposite momentum k
called Cooper-pairs [86, 266]. These Cooper pairs can form over large distances d

63

ranging between 10 nm≤ d ≤ 1000 nm depending on the phononic relaxation time
τ of the atoms in the host lattice. For temperatures below Tc , the Cooper pairs
form a coherent state which can be described by a macroscopic wave function
Ψ(r, t) with amplitude |Ψ0 (r, t)| and phase θ (r, t):
Ψ(r, t) = |Ψ0 (r, t)| · eiθ (r,t) .

(5.1)

The superconducting condensate can carry a finite supercurrent without any
dissipation. In the simplest case, the Cooper pairs forming the condensate are
spin singlet pairs and therefore the supercurrent is not expected to carry any
angular momentum. This immediately raises the following interesting questions:
What happens if we inject a finite spin current into a superconductor? How is
the superconductor affected by such spin current? Can a finite spin current be
transported across a superconductor? The latter question has given rise to the
field of superconducting spintronics [267–269]. As already mentioned, ordinary
superconductors favor the formation of s-wave Cooper pairs with a symmetric
orbital function and antisymmetric spin wave function |↑↓i leading to a net zero
spin current of the condensate. However, both superconducting quasiparticle
excitations [48, 50, 270–272] and spin-triplet Cooper pairs [267, 273] generated
for example by spin-orbit interaction in heavy metals in contact to superconductors [49, 274, 275] are expected to carry spin currents with reduced dissipation
compared to the normal state. Furthermore, superconducting vortices are theoretically discussed as carriers of spin information [276–278]. In recent years, the
charge-to-spin current interconversion mechanisms and the associated spin-orbit
torque effects in the superconducting state have been of great interest as they may
allow us to control of magnetization dynamics with superconducting materials
and thereby to reduce dissipative effects. The pioneering experiments in this
direction were dc transport experiments in superconducting lateral spin valve
structures, which reported changes in the spin signal and spin decay length3
λs [282–284] in the superconducting state.
However, more recent experiments [49, 256, 257, 285–288] have instead put emphasis on investigating the magnetization dynamics of a ferromagnetic metal
(FM) layer in contact to a superconducting layer (SC). Here, changes of either the
FMR-linewidth ∆H or the Gilbert damping α below Tc allow us to investigate
spin injection into superconductors via spin pumping [49, 256, 257, 285, 286, 288].
These experiments have detected a variety of different features in the magnetization damping in superconductor/ferromagnet-heterostructures below Tc ranging
from a monotonic reduction in the Gilbert damping α due to a freeze-out of
3 Note that as the spin transport is diffusive in nature and captured by a spatial variation of its

chemical potential, this quantity is sometimes referred to as a ”spin diffusion length” in literature
(see for example Refs. [257, 279, 280]). However, this terminology is to be contrasted with the
diffusion of conserved particles, such as a gas diffusing into or out of a particular volume and
hence we deem the term ”spin decay length” to be a more descriptive term of the physics at
play [281].

64

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

quasiparticles (QP) mediating the spin transport [256] over the manifestation of a
quasiparticle coherence peak in α for temperatures slightly below Tc [257], to an
enhanced FMR-linewidth ∆H attributed to enhanced spin pumping properties in
the superconducting state mediated by spin-triplet Cooper pairs [49]. To clarify
the origin of these competing results, we have performed an in-depth systematic
study of the magnetization dynamics of several different FM/SC-heterostructures
as a function of temperature above and below Tc and have additionally performed
an investigation of the linear spin-orbit-torques present in these multilayers by
performing bbFMR experiments in combination with the phase sensitive detection
of the microwave transmission signal. This approach allows us to simultaneously
detect the electrical ac currents due to magnetization dynamics, which manifest
in these heterostructures due to inverse spin torques (iST) as well as classical
electrodynamics (i.e. Faraday’s law) [84]. By employing this technique, we are
able to simultaneously quantify the impact of an adjacent SC film on both the
magnetization dynamics (e.g. FMR linewidth) and the field- and damping-like
σST in SC/FM heterostructures. For the latter, we have modified the inductive
coupling analysis reported in Ref. [84] to account for the altered transport properties of the SC layer. In this way, we have developed a new powerful method to
study nonequilibrium spin transport in SCs, which is presented in Sec. 5.1. The
experimental results for the bbFMR analysis of SC/FM-heterostructures are presented in Sec. 5.2. Both the theoretical details of the inductive analysis technique
as well as the experimental results are published in
M. Müller, L. Liensberger, L. Flacke, H. Huebl, A. Kamra, W. Belzig, R. Gross, M.
Weiler, M. Althammer, Temperature-Dependent Spin Transport and Current- Induced
Torques in Superconductor-Ferromagnet Heterostructures, Physical Review Letters 126,
087201 (2021) [68].
An emerging direction within the field of superconducting spintronics is
the investigation of superconductors with large spin-orbit interaction (SOI) [289–
294] or in proximity to heavy metals [49, 286]. This approach allows to study
how SOI affects the superconducting and spin transport properties. Besides the
generation of spin-triplet supercurrents [289, 290], theoretical predictions include
the generation of supercurrents by Rashba-type spin-orbit interaction [37, 295],
the generation of Majorana quasiparticles [296–298] and supercurrent-induced
spin torques [299]. Motivated by the large SOI induced by Ta [44, 280], we have
also performed a growth optimization of superconducting TaN deposited via
reactive dc magnetron sputtering, a material which otherwise finds application
in corrosion-resistive coatings [300, 301] and as a diffusion barrier against Cu
[302–304]. Using the large SOI TaN as a SC layer, we again investigate the
magnetization dynamics of TaN/FM-heterostructures as a function of temperature
using bbFMR spectroscopy combined with the inductive analysis technique to
extract the inverse current-induced torques of the bilayers. The obtained results
are then compared to those of Sec. 5.2. The growth optimization of TaN in Sec. 5.3

65

is the result of the Bachelor thesis performed by Raphael Hoepfl [162] under the
guidance of the author, which resulted in the publication
M. Müller, R. Hoepfl, L. Liensberger, S. Geprägs, H. Huebl, M. Weiler, R. Gross,
M. Althammer, Growth optimization of TaN for superconducting spintronics, Materials
for Quantum Technology 1, 045001 (2021) [69].

5.1 Inductive detection of spin torques
In section 2.3.1, we have established, that in NM/FM-bilayers, magnetization
dynamics in the FM layer due to magnetic resonance can generate charge currents
with a density Jc in the adjacent NM layer via both field-like and damping-like
inverse spin torque effects. The ac component of Jc inductively couples to the
CPW and thereby gives rise to an additional inductance [83, 84]
L J = − L12

Ja
,
J0

(5.2)

where Ja is the ac charge current density flowing in the NM layer along the CPW
in Fig. 3.4, J0 is the magnitude of the charge current density flowing in the CPW
and L12 is the mutual inductance between the FM/NM-bilayer sample and CPW,
which can be modeled as two parallel current carrying sheets with length l and
width wcc and separation δ [305]



µ0 l
2l
L12 =
1 + 2 ln
.
4π
wcc

(5.3)

in the limit δ  wcc . Consequently, we define the net total inductance as
Ltot = L0 + iL J ,

(5.4)

with the inductance of the sample L0 from Eq. (3.5). From Eq. (2.32), we can find
an explicit expression for Ja using the geometry from Fig. 3.4
 


h̄
∂m
∂m
Ja = −sgn · wcc · a · c ×
σd .
σ −c× m×
2e
∂t f
∂t

(5.5)

Here sgn = ±1 accounts for the current direction given by the stack sequence
of the NM/FM-heterostructure (sgn = +1 for substrate/NM/FM-stacking order
and sgn = −1 for substrate/FM/NM-stacking order) as shown in Fig. 5.1(a). We
combine Eqs. (5.2), (5.4) and (5.5) to obtain the total reduced inductance
Ltot
=
[χbb (1 − δbH ) + χcc (1 − δcH )]
h

 i
∂m
∂m
h̄w
L
a
·
c
×
σ
−
c
×
m
×
σd
cc
12
f
∂t
∂t
ld
.
= µ0 FM + i · sgn ·
4wcc
2eI0 [χbb (1 − δbH ) + χcc (1 − δcH )]

L̃tot =

66

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

(5.6)

From Eq. (5.6), we see, that the first contribution to L̃tot from the inductance of the
FM layer has a frequency independent and strictly real component and the second
contribution is a complex frequency-dependent function, which critically depends
on the measurement geometry and magnitude as well as symmetry of the inverse
spin torques. For the magnetization unit vector, we use the expression4



[χ xx h x (1 − δxa − δxc ) + χ xy hy (1 − δya − δyc )]ei2π f t
1 

m=
 [χyx h x (1 − δxa − δxc ) + χyy hy (1 − δya − δyc )]ei2π f t  .
Ms
Ms

(5.7)

defined in Sec. 2.2. Here, we again account for the different driving field components contributing in the three measurement geometries in Fig. 3.4 with the terms
(1 − δia ). Additionally we have to consider that any linear response (m and Jc )
due to the c-direction driving field component is antisymmetric if mirrored along
the ac-plane. Thus, currents induced by hc do not contribute to the inductance.
Hence, we further simplify Eq. (5.7) by adding the terms δxc and δyc .
In the following, we extend the model in Ref. [84] and derive explicit expressions for L̃tot for the three different measurement geometries defined in section
3.3.1 based on the coordinate system shown in Fig. 3.4 by inserting Eq. (5.7) into
Eq.(5.6).
• Hext k a (ip, a → x, b → z, c → y):
For the ip-geometry Hext k a, Eq. (5.7) takes the form


hwcc L12 hy iσf χyy + iσd χyx
ldFM
L̃tot = µ0
+ i · sgn · f ·
4wcc
2eI0 [χ xx + χyy ]
ld
hL [−σf + iσd e( f )]
= µ0 FM + sgn · f · 12
,
4wcc
4eMs[e2 ( f ) + 1]

(5.8)

where we have used hy = I0 /(2wcc ) and χyx = iχ xx /e( f ) = iχyy e( f ). By
studying the net inductive coupling L̃tot as function of frequency over a
broad frequency bandwidth ≃ (20 − 30) GHz and fitting it to Eq. (.5.8), we
can hence extract the field- and damping-like spin torque conductivities.
However, we need to account for the evolving ellipticity via e( f ) as function
of f , by inserting Hext = Hres ( f ) in Eq. (2.31).
• Hext k b (ip, a → x, b → y, c → z):
For the other possible ip-geometry Hext k b, Eq. (5.7) can be simplified to
L̃tot = µ0

ldFM
.
4wcc

(5.9)

Notably, in this ip-geometry, the contribution of the spin torques to L̃tot
vanishes. This can be easily understood, as the inverse spin torque currents
4 Here, we again map the coordinate system (x, y and z) of the magnetization dynamics from

Fig. 2.2 onto that of the sample on the CPW (a, b and c) in Fig. 3.4(b).

5.1

Inductive detection of spin torques

67

in this geometry are driven by the oop-component of the rf driving field hc ,
which can not give rise to an inductance.
• Hext k c (oop, a → y, b → z, c → x):
Finally, in the oop-geometry, due to the circular magnetization precession
(e = 1), the spin-orbit torque conductivities are linearly proportional to f
via
ldFM
hL [−σf + iσd ]
(5.10)
+ sgn · f · 12
L̃tot = µ0
4wcc
4eMs
allowing for the simple detection of the spin torque conductivities.
Irrespective of the used geometry, the reduced inductance can be obtained from
the change of the complex microwave transmission parameter in resonance ∆S21
by replacing L0 by Ltot in Eq. (3.8) and solving by L̃tot .

5.1.1 Modifications to the inductive detection technique in
the superconducting state
T>TC

(a)
sgn= +1

sgn= -1

Substrate

Heﬀ
Heﬀ
CPW

m

hCPW

Substrate
Heﬀ

JSC

Ferromagnet

Superconductor

Heﬀ

m

Ferromagnet

sgn= -1

sgn= +1
Substrate

Substrate

Normal metal

T<TC

(b)

m

Normal metal

Ferromagnet

CPW

CPW

hCPW

hSC

m

Ferromagnet

hSC

JSC
Superconductor

hCPW

CPW

hCPW

Fig. 5.1. – Illustration of the individual rf-driving field components hrf,i driving the
magnetization dynamics in substrate/SC/FM heterostructures (sgn = +1) and in substrate/FM/SC heterostructures (sgn = −1) above (a) and below (b) the superconducting
transition temperature Tc . In the normal state [panel (a)] for T > Tc , the magnetization
dynamics in the ferromagnet is asymmetrically driven from its top side by the driving
field of the CPW hCPW . As the driving field components from eddy currents flowing
in the thin film superconductor, are negligible in the normal state, the magnetization
precession magnitude m is independent of the stack sequence. In the superconducting
state [panel (b)], for T < Tc , superconducting image currents create an additional driving
field contribution hSC and either enhance (sgn = +1) or reduce (sgn = −1) the net total
driving field hrf and correspondingly the precession amplitude of m. Figure is based on
Ref. [122].

When replacing the normal metal layer in our NM/FM-heterostructures
with a superconductor, the model by Berger et al. [84] needs to be modified to
account for the unusual properties of superconductors, when exposed to both
static and dynamic external magnetic fields in our FMR experiments. In detail,
superconductors are perfect diamagnets (χ = −1) that fully expel an external field
with the magnetic field Hext from their interior over a characteristic length scale

68

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

known as the London penetration depth λL [86, 306], which is typically in the
(10 nm ≤ λL ≤ 100 nm)-range. This effect is known as the Meißner effect [307].
As the expulsion of Hext is associated with an energy cost, the formation of
Cooper pairs of electrons in superconductivity is only energetically favorable up
to a certain threshold known as the critical field magnitude Hc . There exists,
however, type-II of superconductors, which avoids the energy cost associated with
the magnetic field expulsion by forming a mixed state above a lower critical field.
In this mixed state the superconductor contains so-called vortices which carry the
magnetic flux Φ = Φ0 = h/2e and have a normal core. As a consequence, type
II-superconductors are more resilient to external magnetic fields withstanding
external oop magnetic fields of up to 50 T. In our experiments, we perform bbFMR
in the ip-geometry Hext k a to avoid the formation of normal state vortices in the
SC layer in FMR experiments (Nxx , Nyy ≈ 0) and thereby detect a larger effect
from a SC layer, which is only weakly penetrated by vortices in the sample plane,
while simultaneously being able to inductively detect the spin torque conductivities in the normal and superconducting state [see Eq. (3.10)]. When studying
the FMR amplitude A in SC/FM-heterostructures in the superconducting state,
we indirectly observe the superconducting Meißner effect. Depending on the
stack sequence, A is either enhanced in the case sgn = +1 for substrate/SC/FM
heterostructures or reduced for sgn = −1 for substrate/FM/SC heterostructures.
This is due to the fact, that for substrate/SC/FM heterostructures, rf Meißner
currents in the SC layer mirror the external driving field of the CPW hCPW [308]
and thus lead to a net enhanced rf driving field hrf , whereas in the latter case for
substrate/FM/SC heterostructures, the SC is ’sandwiched’ between FM and CPW
and hence its Meißner screening currents generate a driving field that counteracts
hCPW . This effect is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5.1. The enhancement of A
can be well explained by superconducting image charge currents repelling the
oscillatory driving field of the CPW hrf . Moreover, we note that the CPW detects only the upper half of the flux Φdyn generated by the precessing macrospin
M of the FM layer in the normal state. However, for the stack sequence substrate/SC/FM (sgn = +1), this fraction is enhanced below Tc as the underlying
superconductor also expels the lower half of Φdyn from its interior via image
currents and thereby essentially enhances the flux felt by the CPW. Consequently
in the superconducting state the magnetization of the FM layer is not only driven
with twice the net driving field hrf , which overall enhances the precession amplitude A by a factor of 4, but the CPW also detects twice the net flux generated
by the dynamically precessing M. As a result an overall enhancement in FMR
signal of up to 8 times is possible. We note that this effect is not restricted to
superconductors and can likewise also be observed for NM/FM-heterostructures,
when the NM layer is a good electric conductor giving rise to pronounced eddy
screening currents. In Ref. [308], a 7-fold increase in FMR-amplitude has been
observed in thick Au/Co-heterostructures. Therefore, the enhanced FMR ampli-

5.1

Inductive detection of spin torques

69

tude in NM/FM-heterostructures compared to bare FM layers incorporating both
thick and highly conductive NM layers might enable the characterization of even
thinner FM potentially down to VdW monolayer materials such as Cr2Ge2Te6,
which are of interest for integrated spintronics devices [309–311]. In our experiments, substrate/SC/FM-heterostructures with sgn = +1 are used to benefit
from the enhanced A in the SC state. Experiments on inverted stack sequences
with sgn = −1 yielded bad fitting results in the superconducting state due to the
strongly reduced inductive coupling, when the SC screens the FM layer from the
driving field of the CPW [122]. The greatly altered inductive coupling strength of
SC/FM-heterostructures in the SC state compared to the normal state requires a
modification of Ref. [84], where a constant L̃0 between FM and NM irrespective
of stacking order and sample conductivity is assumed. From Eqs. (3.3) and (5.8),
we note that the inductive coupling between FM layer and CPW L̃0 scales quadratically with the net oscillatory driving field amplitude hrf , whereas the inductive
coupling to the NM/SC-layer L̃ J is only linearly proportional to hrf . Thus, we
SC in the SC state to a constant L̃ detected in the
normalize our spin torques σST
0
1/2
normal state by adding the normalization factor E , where E is the enhanced
inductive coupling between sample and CPW in the SC state, to L̃ J in Eq. (5.8).
Another modification to the model of Berger et al., [84] required in the SC state
stems from the contribution of Faraday currents σF to σST as σF is reciprocally
proportional to the effective surface impedance Zeff of the heterostructure via
σF =

eµ0 Ms dFM
.
h̄Zeff ( f )

(5.11)

In the normal state, Zeff is assumed to be constant with frequency [84] for the sake
of simplicity. Superconductors, however, exhibit a surface impedance, which is
strongly frequency-dependent. For Zeff , we use [86]
Zeff ( f ) = 4µ20 π2 λ3eff σ0

nn
− i · µ0 2π f λeff
n

(5.12)

Here, σ0 is the normal state electric conductance of the SC layer, nn /n is the
fraction of the normal-conducting phase below Tc and λeff = λ2L /dSC is the
thin film London penetration depth [312]. In the following, we neglect the real
part of Eq. (5.12), which is a valid approximation for frequencies in the low
to intermediate GHz range. To account for the frequency-dependent surface
impedance of superconductors, we insert the imaginary part of Zeff from Eq. (5.12)
in Eq. (5.11) resulting in
eMs dFM · dSC
σF = i ·
.
(5.13)
h f λ2L
As the inverse proportionality of σF to f in Eq. (5.13) cancels out with the linearly f scaling of the spin torque conductivities in Eq. (3.10), in the superconducting state
Faraday currents create an offset L̃F in the imaginary part in the superconducting

70

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

state, which scales as function of temperature with the London penetration depth
λ2L .
Taking the enhanced inductive coupling and frequency-dependent surface impedance
in the superconducting state into account, the net reduced inductive coupling between substrate/SC/FM-heterostructure (sgn = +1) and CPW in the ip-geometry
Hext k a takes the form

 M̃0 E + i ·

L̃F
+ f ·C
[e2 ( f )+1]
L̃tot =
 L̃ + f · C [−σf +iσd e( f )] ,
0
[e2 ( f )+1]

√

−σ +iσ e( f )

d
E [ef2 ( f )+
, for T ≤ Tc ,
1]

for T > Tc .

(5.14)

Here, we have introduced the constant inductive coupling constant C = hL12 /4eMs
and E is the dimensionless enhancement factor. We note, that the field-like torque
conductivities σiREE and σF scale differently with frequency in the SC state allowing
for their separate determination below Tc , whereas they can not be disentangled
via symmetry arguments in the normal state (see Sec. 2.3.1). However, in the
superconducting state, additional contributions to σf can manifest for example
from supercurrent-induced spin orbit torques [299] or the theoretically proposed
vortex spin Hall effect [276]. Hence, we also denote the net field-like spin torques
in the superconducting state as σf .

5.2 Spin torques in NbN/Py-heterostructures
Our SC/FM-heterostructures are deposited on Si (001) substrates with a 1 µm
thick thermally grown SiO2-capping layer in the Superbowls sputtering machine
(see Sec. 3.1.5). For our initial study [68], we chose NbN as our superconducting
layer due to its resilience to external magnetic fields (µ0 Hc2 ≤ 15 T [86]) and high
superconducting transition temperature of up to TC =16.8 K [313–315]. These
properties render NbN an ideal candidate for bbFMR at cryogenic temperatures
as it offers both a large margin in experimentally accessible temperatures between
T = 2 K and Tc and also in the magnitude of the applied external field Hext ,
which directly translates to the bandwidth of applicable driving frequencies f in
bbFMR [122]. We grew NbN both on the bare substrate and on Pt to investigate its
spin pumping properties. Here, we chose the alloy Ni80Fe20 (Permalloy, Py) for its
resilient magnetic properties irrespective of the base layer, it is grown on. Lastly,
we deposited a thin capping layer of Ta on our FM to protect it from oxidization.
The respective sputtering parameters of the individual materials are listed in
the Appendix in Tab. B1. While the thickness of NbN (16 nm) and Py(6 nm) are
constant, the Pt, acting as a spin sink, is varied in thickness and position within
the layer sequence. The stack sequences of the four samples A-D investigated in
our initial study are illustrated in Fig. 5.2. Note, that all samples are grown in the
stacking order substrate/SC/FM corresponding to sgn = +1 in Eq. (5.5).

5.2 Spin torques in NbN/Py-heterostructures

71

A
TaOx (2)
Py (6)
NbN (16)
SiO2

B

C

TaOx (2)
Py (6)

D
TaOx (2)
Py (6)

TaOx (2)
Py (6)
Pt (0.5)

NbN (16)
Pt (5)
SiO2

Pt (15)

NbN (16)

NbN (16)

SiO2

SiO2

Fig. 5.2. – Layer stack of samples investigated in this thesis. Numbers show the layer
thicknesses in nm. For bbFMR, they are mounted face-down on top of a coplanar
waveguide.

Sample
Tc [K]

A
11.5

B
9.0

C
10.0

D
10.2

Tab. 5.1. – Superconducting transition temperature Tc of the samples investigated in this
study.

The layer thickness dSC = 16 nm of NbN was
chosen to be as thin as possible, while maintaining
JciSHE
Pt
iSHE
H
a reasonable Tc . The superconducting transition
Js
temperatures of the samples are listed in Tab. 5.1.
ŝ
NbN
The contactless method, with which Tc is determined from the complex scattering parameter S21
m
Heﬀ
is explained in the Appendix C.
Py
For the FM layer, the thickness of Py dFM =
CPW
6 nm was selected to ensure a good signal-to-noise
Fig. 5.3. – Schematic illustration for the generation of the ratio. For these samples, we perform bbFMR excharge current density JciSHE by periments in the ip-geometry Hext k a in Fig. 3.4(b)
ac iSHE. The ac flux ΦiSHE ∝ and characterize the magnetization dynamics paHiSHE generated by JciSHE is coupled into the CPW. Note, that in rameters and spin-torque conductivities as functhis figure, the aspect ratio be- tion of temperature around Tc using the Chaos
tween sample thickness and cen- cryostat (see Sec. 3.3.1). For the frequency bandter conductor width of the CPW
width, we chose the range (10 GHz ≤ f ≤ 36 GHz)
is distorted.
at a VNA output power of 1 mW, such that all dynamics are in the linear response regime.
To describe the physics at play in our samples, we begin by discussing the
spin pumping in sample configuration B. In the normal state for T > Tc , the
resonantly precessing magnetization of the Py layer pumps a spin current density
Js across the Py/NbN interface (T > Tc ) and through the NbN into the adjacent
Pt layer as illustrated in Fig. 5.3. In the Pt layer, Js is absorbed and converted into
a charge current with density Jc via the iSHE, where we assume vanishing iSHE
contributions from the SC-layer due to the small spin Hall angle of NbN [279]. On

72

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

the one hand, this spin pumping effect causes damping and manifests itself as an
additional broadening of the FMR (see Sec. 2.3). On the other hand, the ac charge
current density J iSHE generated by the iSHE generates an ac magnetic field which
is inductively coupled into the CPW and thus can be detected as a non-zero σd in
L̃. Here, it is important to note, that in Fig. 5.3, the aspect ratio between sample
thickness and center conductor width of the CPW is distorted. In our experiments,
the NbN and Py layers are very thin in the nm-range. Hence, flux induced by the
iSHE in the Pt layer ΦiSHE can be efficiently coupled into the CPW.
In contrast, sample configuration A serves as a reference sample, where
we expect negligible effects of spin pumping and the iSHE due to the missing
Pt layer. In sample C, we insert a very thin Pt interlayer between SC and FM,
which is expected to both enhance the spin torque conductivities in the SC state
and potentially induce an exchange field in the SC to promote the formation of
spin-triplet Cooper pairs [49, 274]. Finally, in sample D, the angular momentum
injected from the Py layer is pumped directly into and absorbed in the Pt layer.
Consequently, we expect to observe both an enhanced Gilbert damping and σd ,
irrespective of the state of the SC layer. Hence, in this sample, the SC and FM
layer can be viewed as uncoupled.
The ferromagnetic resonance field Hres ( f ), linewidth ∆H ( f ) as well as real
and imaginary part of the reduced inductive coupling L̃( f ) recorded for sample
B are plotted in Fig. 5.4 for temperatures slightly below (T ≈ 0.8Tc ) and above
(T ≈ 1.2Tc ) the superconducting transition temperature of the NbN layer.
The raw data for Hres ( f ), ∆H ( f ) and Re/Im[ L̃( f )] of the other samples A, C
and D in both the normal- and superconducting state is presented in the Appendix
Sec. D. The magnetization dynamics parameters are extracted by fitting the raw
data in panels (a) and (b) with Eq. (2.26) and the data in panels (c) and (d) with
Eq. (2.28), whereas the spin-torque conductivities are extracted by fitting the raw
data with the real (e), (f) and imaginary part (g), (h) of Eq. (5.14). For Hres ( f ), we
use the modified ip-Kittel fit in Eq. (2.26) to allow for an oop-anisotropy induced
by superconducting Meißner currents as observed in Refs. [287, 316]. The fitted
oop
g-factor, effective magnetization Meff , out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy field Hani
and inhomogeneous line broadening Hinh of the four samples A-D around Tc as
function of the reduced temperature are shown in Fig. 5.5.
From Fig. 5.5 panels (a) and (b), we find that both the g-factor and effective
magnetization Meff are comparable for all samples and are unaffected by the onset
of superconductivity. The values of g ≈ 2.1 and µ0 Meff ≈ 0.97 T are comparable
with literature values for Py [124, 125, 137, 317, 318]. Notably, we observe a slightly
larger g-factor for the samples C and D with a direct Py/Pt-interface, which
we attribute to the small field-like contribution of Im( G↑↓ ) in Eq. (2.33). As the
effective magnetization µ0 Meff in Fig. 5.5(b) is comparable to literature values
for µ0 Ms [124, 125, 317], we can rule out the presence of an in-plane magnetic
oop
anisotropy in our samples. For the out-of-plane anisotropy field Hani in Fig. 5.5(c),

5.2 Spin torques in NbN/Py-heterostructures

73

(a )

0 .5

µ 0H

re s

(T )

(a )

T = 0 .8 T c

1 5
µ 0H

2 0

in h

1 6

3 0

3 5

(e )

1 5 0

(f)
~

~

L S0 C

~

R e (L ) (fH )

0

0

L 0

(g )

5 0

(h )
~

L F

~

Im (L ) (fH )

T = 1 .2 T c
(d )

(c )

µ 0 ∆H

(m T )

0 .0

0
0

1 0

2 0
f (G H z )

3 0

0

1 0

2 0

3 0

f (G H z )

Fig. 5.4. – Resonance field Hres ( f ) and linewidth ∆H ( f ) as well as reduced inductive
coupling Re( L̃) and Im( L̃) for sample B for temperatures slightly below and above Tc
together with the fitting curves according to Eq. (2.26) [(a) and (b)], Eq. (2.28) [(c) and (d)]
and Eq. (5.14) [(e)-(h)]. The green dashed box and inset in panel (c) indicates the reduction
in ∆H in the superconducting state as the orange data points representing the magnetic
linewidth above Tc are situated above the blue data points of the magnetic linewidth
below Tc . The dark orange dotted line in panel (g) represents the normal state offset in
Im( L̃).

we observe small positive values in particular for the samples C and D with a direct
Py/Pt-interface induced by the spin-orbit interaction in Pt [102–105] (see Sec. 2.1).
oop
In the superconducting state, a small increase in Hani is observed for samples
A, B and D due to the field induced by the superconducting Meißner currents,
which is in agreement to the findings in Refs. [287, 316]. The low magnitude
oop
of the change in Hani is attributed to the small thickness of the NbN layer. For
oop
sample C, Hani remains roughly constant as function of T, which indicates that
the oop-contribution of Pt dominates compared to that of the superconducting
Meißner currents. We observe in Fig. 5.4(c) a slightly reduced FMR-linewidth
∆H below Tc , which together with an enhanced inhomogeneous broadening Hinh
translates into a reduced Gilbert damping contribution α in the superconducting
state (see inset in Fig. 5.4). The temperature dependence of α is discussed in great
detail together with the damping-like inverse spin torque conductivity in the
interpretation of Fig. 5.7. The inhomogeneous linewidth broadening Hinh as a
function of reduced temperature for all samples is plotted in Fig. 5.5(d). We detect
the manifestation of a sizable Hinh in the superconducting state, which is likely
caused by an incoherent precession of M at the FM/SC-interface as proposed in
Ref. [287]. The non-constant Hinh as function of T demonstrates the necessity to
study the evolution of the FMR-linewidth ∆H over a large frequency range to

74

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

2 .1 2
(a )

(b )

e ff ( T

C

2 .1 0

A

1 .0

µ 0M

g

)

D

B

0 .8
2 .0 8
(c )

(d )

(m T )

(m T )

1 .0

µ 0H

µ 0H

in h

o o p
a n i

2

0 .5

0
0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

1 .5

0 .0

0 .5

1 .0

1 .5

T /T c

Fig. 5.5. – Temperature dependence of the magnetization dynamics parameters for
the samples A-D. Both the g-factor in (a) and the effective magnetization Meff in (b)
exhibit no changes in the superconducting state. (c) The out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy
oop
field Hani increases due to a magnetic out-of-plane field contribution from the induced
Meißner fields in the superconducting state. (d) The change of the inhomogeneous FMR
linewidth broadening Hinh in the superconducting state is attributed to the non-uniform
magnetization precession.

reliably study the spin pumping properties of superconducting materials as will
be later exemplified in the discussion of Fig. 5.8.
In contrast to the minor changes in resonance field and linewidth in Fig. 5.4(a)(d), for the reduced inductive coupling L̃ we observe a dramatic change below Tc
a large increase in magnitude in panels (e) and (g) compared to their normal state
counterparts in panels (f) and (h) due to superconducting image currents enhancing the net total driving field hrf and correspondingly the precession amplitude
of m [see Fig. 5.1(b)]. The enhancement factor E ≈ 4.5 can be extracted from the
y-axis intercept of L̃ via L̃SC
0 / L̃0 [see Eq. (5.14)]. Apart from the significantly enhanced inductive coupling in L̃0 , we also observe an altered frequency-evolution of
L̃( f ) in panels (a)-(d). In the normal state, we observe a negligible slope in Re( L̃)
in panel (f), indicating the presence of only weak field-like σf . For metallic NbN,
this is expected, as it is neither a good conductor causing sizable Faraday currents
nor a material with large spin-orbit interaction giving rise to charge currents from
the iREE. In the superconducting state, however, we observe a large negative slope
in Re( L̃), which will be discussed in detail in the following subsection. For the
imaginary part of L̃ above Tc in panel (h), we detect a sizable positive slope from
charge currents generated by the iSHE in the Pt layer 5.3. This result indicates,
that substantial spin currents can be transmitted across the 16 nm thick NbN layer.

5.2 Spin torques in NbN/Py-heterostructures

75

This is in agreement with literature predicting a spin decay length of λsd = 14 nm
in NbN [279]. Below Tc , the slope in panel (g) is reduced, which demonstrates
the altered spin transport properties in the superconducting state. In our fitting
routine, we allow for a y-axis intercept in the imaginary part Im( L̃) instead of
applying a rotational matrix with the angle β to the data as performed in Ref. [84].
Below Tc , we expect this offset to increase due to Faraday currents [Eq. (5.13)]
giving rise to the inductive contribution L̃F . In our experimental data, we hence
define L̃F as the change in Im( L̃0 ) in the superconducting state [see Fig. 5.4(g)]. To
get a qualitative picture for the evolution of the reduced inductances L̃0 and L̃ J ( f )
from the inductive coupling of the CPW with the FM layer and to the NbN and
Pt layer, we fit L̃ in Fig. 5.4(e)-(h) with
L̃( f ) = L̃0 + L̃ J ( f )

= L̃0 +

(5.15)

f
· [Re(∆ L̃ J ) + i · Im(∆ L̃ J )e( f )].
2
e (f) + 1

Here, we define ∆ L̃ J as the linear frequency dependence of L̃ J , which corresponds
to the contribution to L̃ of the inverse spin torques [see Eq. (5.14)]. The real
(triangles) and imaginary part (squares) of the fitted L̃0 and L̃ J are plotted for
sample B as a function of reduced temperature in Fig. 5.6(a) and (b), respectively.
0 .4
(b )

R e
Im
~
∆L J ( f H / G H z )

~
L 0 (p H )

(a )

0 .2
µ

µ

n 2s

n s

0 .0

0

-5
0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

1 .5

0 .5

1 .0

1 .5

T /T c

Fig. 5.6. – Reduced inductive coupling parameters for sample B plotted as a function
of reduced temperature around Tc . In (a), we plot the real (triangles) and imaginary
(squares) parts of the inductive coupling offset L̃0 . In (b), we show real (triangles) and
imaginary part (squares) of the complex linear frequency dependence ∆ L̃ J of the reduced
inductance L̃. The colored lines indicate the scaled Cooper pair density ns following
BCS-theory and the error bars originate from fitting the extracted raw data for L̃ with
Eq. (5.15).

Compared to L̃0 at T > Tc , we observe in Fig. 5.6(a) a strongly enhanced
inductive coupling strength Re( L̃0 ) between the FM layer and CPW in the SC state
due to the enhanced FMR amplitude, that gradually increases with decreasing
T. A net enhancement factor of E ≈ 7 is observed for the lowest experimentally
accessible temperature. This result is compatible with the FMR-amplitude enhancement observed for the FMR in Co, when using thick and highly conductive

76

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

Au seedlayers in Ref. [308]. In a naive picture, the temperature dependence of
Re( L̃0 ), can be mapped to that of the superconducting image currents JSC ( T ) via
JSC ( T ) = −2ens ( T ) · vs ,

(5.16)

where e is the electron charge, ns is the superconducting Cooper pair density
and vs is the Cooper pair drift velocity in the superconducting state. Since
these image currents give rise to a net driving field hrf that quadratically scales
with L̃0 according to Eq. (3.3), we expect that the enhancement in L̃0 also scales
quadratically with ns . We model n2s following BCS-theory [319, 320] (For details
see Ref. [122]), via
ns ( T ) = nn /2[1 − Y( T )],
(5.17)
where nn is the normal state electron density and Y( T ) is the Yosida function
Y( T ) =

1
∂ f ( Ek )
.
−
∑
D ( EF ) k
∂Ek

(5.18)

Here, D ( EF ) is the density of states at the Fermi energy and f ( Ek ) is the FermiDirac distribution of quasiparticles with energy Ek . The square of the particle
density n2s is shown as a pink line in Fig. 5.6(a). We find that the predicted
temperature dependence of L̃0 ( T ) scales more strongly with T than what is
observed experimentally. We attribute this disparity to the rising contribution of
the superconducting kinetic inductance Lk to L̃0 for elevated temperatures [321].
In analogy to Re( L̃0 ), we observe an increase in Im( L̃0 ) in the superconducting
state, while Im( L̃0 ) ≈ 0 in the normal state for T > Tc . This increase in Im( L̃0 ) in
the SC state is expected to appear due to the complex surface impedance Zeff (ω )
in the superconducting state [see Eq. (5.14)]. As the London penetration depth λL
is related to the superconducting Cooper pair density via λ2L ∝ 1/ns (see London
equations [86, 306]) and L̃F ∝ 1/λ2L [see Eq. (5.13)], we model the enhancement
in Im( L̃0 ) in the superconducting state with a theory curve to ns ( T ) following
Eq. (5.17) in Fig. 5.6(a) (purple line) and observe a good agreement with our raw
data. We now turn to the linear contribution ∆ L̃ J shown in Fig. 5.6(b). Note that
∆ L̃ J 6= 0 is observed when electrical ac currents are generated in the NM/SClayers by the magnetization dynamics m(t) in the FM and the real and imaginary
part of ∆ L̃ J are respectively attributed to the manifestation of field- and dampinglike inverse spin torques. We find that both Re(∆ L̃ J ) (triangles) and Im(∆ L̃ J )
(squares) change sign and exhibit large negative values in the superconducting
state. This result indicates the modification of both field- and damping-like spin
torque conductivities σd and σf in the superconducting state, which are linearly
proportional to the real and imaginary part of ∆ L̃ J . The extracted damping-like
and field-like current-induced torques σd and σf derived for the four samples in
Fig. 5.2 are plotted in Figs. 5.7 and 5.9, respectively. In Fig. 5.7(a), we observe large

5.2 Spin torques in NbN/Py-heterostructures

77

1 5
(b )

(a )
D

D

B
α( 1 0 -3 )

σd ( 1 0 5 / Ωm )

5

C
0

C

1 0

A

B
A

0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

1 .5

0 .5

1 .0

1 .5

T /T c

Fig. 5.7. – (a) Damping-like spin torque conductivity σd plotted as a function of T/Tc . In
the normal state, the samples B and D containing a thick Pt layer exhibit a large positive
σd due to the iSHE in Pt. Below Tc , all samples show a very similar decay of σd with
decreasing T irrespective of Pt spin sink layer. (b) Temperature dependence of the Gilbert
D
damping α in the SC state as a function of T/Tc . The apparent
decrease of α is due to
the suppression of spin pumping into the SC due to the freeze-out of thermally excited
quasiparticles. The error bars originate from fitting the extracted raw data for L̃ with
Eq. (5.14) (a) and Eq. (2.27) for ∆H ( f ) (b).

σd values for the samples B and D in the normal state for T > Tc as expected
from the iSHE in Pt. In contrast, sample A (NbN/Py bilayer) exhibits only a small
positive σd despite the negative spin Hall angle in NbN [47, 279], which has been
confirmed for our NbN thin films in Ref. [322]. We attribute this observation to a
small contribution of the Py layer to the iSHE. This contribution to σd dominates in
the normal state compared to that of the NbN layer due to its higher conductivity.
For sample C, we detect a low σd , indicating the reduction in the spin-to-charge
current conversion due to the low thickness of the Pt layer in sample C. Overall,
the normal state results can be consistently understood in a picture where the Pt
layer acts as a spin sink and efficiently converts spin- into charge currents. The
NbN layer takes a passive role as a spin transparent layer, which does itself not
give rise to a detectable contribution to σd .
In the superconducting state, σd rapidly decreases below Tc and eventually
reaches a similar slightly negative value for samples A, B, and C, while staying
slightly positive for sample D. There are two effects that affect σd in the SC state:
First, there is a strongly modified spin transport carried by thermally excited
quasiparticles in the SC [50, 257] and, second, there is an electrical shunting effect
of charge currents by the SC [323, 324]. We again start our discussion with the
physics at play in sample B. Here, the injected spin current has to pass the SC
layer to reach the Pt layer, such that altered spin transport properties in the SC
play an especially important role in this sample. In contrast, in sample A, angular
momentum is injected exclusively into the superconducting NbN layer and we
only expect the detection of a non-zero σd in the superconducting state in the
presence of a sizable iSHE. Similarly, for sample C, as we do not observe a sizable
iSHE from the thin Pt layer in the normal state, we also expect dominant spin

78

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

injection into the NbN layer. Finally, in sample D, the dominant source of iSHE
in the normal state is the Pt-layer and no spin current can reach the SC due to
the small spin decay length λS ≃ 4 nm [40] in Pt. Hence, sample D serves as a
reference sample, where no spin current is pumped into the superconductor. In
this picture. The small negative values of σd in samples A, B and C below Tc
are consistent with the quasiparticle mediated inverse spin Hall effect (QMiSHE)
in superconductors [325–328], whereas the reduced positive σd of sample D is
attributed to a superconducting shunting effect of the charge currents generated
by the iSHE [323, 324]. In Ref. [47] the QMiSHE in NbN has been observed via
non-local dc transport measurements utilizing non-local lateral spin injection
devices as a significantly enhanced iSHE voltage for reduced T. In our bbFMR
experiments, we instead detect a saturation of σd towards negative values for
T 7→ 0 K. This discrepancy can be explained by the different applied detection
techniques:
We detect the flux generated by the dynamic J c (caused by the spin-to-charge
current conversion via the QMiSHE) as a change in inductive coupling strength
between NbN layer and CPW, whereas Wakamura et al. [47] measured the accumulation of electron- and hole-like quasiparticles on opposite sides of a superconducting NbN strip as a voltage signal. For nonlocal devices the spin Hall resistance
∆RSH generated by quasiparticles is proportional to both quasiparticle resistance
ρqp and spin Hall angle ΘSH . Following Refs. [47, 329], ρqp is obtained by normalizing the normal state longitudinal resistance ρlong to the amount of quasiparticles
populated above the superconducting gap ∆ at a certain temperature T, which is
given by the Fermi distribution f 0 (∆( T )) resulting in
ρqp = ρlong /[2 f 0 (∆( T ))].

(5.19)

Here ρlong is the normal state longitudinal resistivity along the NbN strip. From
Eq. 5.19, the increase in ρqp for low temperatures immediately becomes apparent,
as f 0 (∆( T )) decreases with the increasing superconducting gap ∆( T ). The spin
Hall angle ΘSH on the other hand comprises extrinsic contributions from both
side jump (SJ) [330]- and skew scattering [331] (SS) as well as intrinsic effects [332].
By taking all these three contributions into account, the Hall resistivity ρSH can be
expressed as
ρSH = aρlong + bρ2long ,
(5.20)
where a and b are proportionality constants quantifying the impact of skew
scattering (a) and SJ-scattering plus intrinsic effects (b), respectively. As established
in Sec. 2.3.1, the spin Hall angle is defined as the ratio between spin Hall and
longitudinal resistance ΘSH = ρSH /ρlong . Consequently, in the normal state, it
takes the form
ΘSH = a + bρlong
(5.21)

5.2 Spin torques in NbN/Py-heterostructures

79

resulting in a linear function with respect to ρlong . To account for the enhanced
longitudinal resistance in the case of quasiparticle charge transport in superconductors, we replace ρlong in Eq. (5.21) with the QP resistance ρqp from Eq. (5.19).
Consequently, the intrinsic and side-jump contributions to ΘSH diverge with ρqp
for decreasing T in the SC state. As a result, in non-local spin current experiments,
a dramatically enhanced spin Hall resistance ∆RSH ∝ ρqp ΘSH as observed by
Wakamura et al. is in agreement with theoretical predictions. In our experiments
on the other hand, we measure the flux generated by charge currents generated by
the QMiSHE (J iSHE
) instead of ∆RSH (the open circuit voltage). The corresponding
c
damping-like σd is related to the spin Hall angle via σd ∝ ΘSH /ρqp following
Ref. [84]. Consequently, the divergent ρqp cancels out , leading to a net constant
value for σd . This theoretical prediction is in agreement with our results for σd in
Fig. 5.7, which appear to saturate at slightly negative values for T → 0 K. Furthermore, in this picture, the negative sign of σd can be attributed to the negative spin
Hall angle in NbN [47, 279]. In summary, by using existing theoretical models for
the quasiparticle-mediated inverse spin Hall effect (QMiSHE), we can satisfactorily
explain our results for the damping-like σd in samples A-C below Tc . Deviations
in the detected quantitative magnitude of this effect from results of Wakamura et.
al. in Ref. [47] originate from the different applied detection methods. For sample
D, we observe no negative σd as the spin currents are absorbed in the Pt layer
and the transition into the superconducting state NbN has no influence on this
absorption. However, we do observe a strong reduction in σd , which indicates
that the adjacent NbN nonetheless alters the spin-to-charge current conversion
process in Pt. We attribute this reduction in σd to a shunting process of the NbN
layer, which reduces the charge current density JiSHE
in Pt and as a result also σd .
c
Likewise, a strong reduction in the detected magnitude of the iSHE in Pt due to
shunting effects when brought into contact with highly conductive Cu has been
reported in Refs. [323, 324]. Here, we observe an analogue shunting effect for
superconductors, giving rise to the same strong suppression of the iSHE.
To support the validity of our inductive analysis technique and the interpretation of our results, we compare the damping-like σd to the extracted Gilbert
damping α of the Py layer, which is plotted as a function of T/Tc in Fig. 5.7(b).
Due to the spin pumping contribution αSP to α [see Eq. (2.35)], the Gilbert damping
also directly probes spin current transport in our heterostructures. The magnitude
of α for sample A well matches literature values for the damping of Py thin
films [124, 125, 137, 317, 318] and hence serves as our reference sample in the
absence of spin pumping into Pt. Consequently, the larger α of samples B-D can
be attributed to spin pumping into their respective Pt layers. Consequently, we
observe a substantial spin pumping contribution from Pt for all temperatures
for samples C and D due to the direct Py/Pt-interface. For sample B, where the
spin currents must transmit the NbN layer to enter the Pt, however, we observe
for temperatures T < Tc , that the magnitude of α approaches the values of our

80

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

reference sample A. This suggests the strong suppression of spin pumping into
Pt in the superconducting state in agreement to the results of Bell et al. [256].
Furthermore, similarly to Refs. [49,274], we detect an enhancement in the net FMR
linewidth ∆H in the SC state at low frequencies in our samples as apparent in
Fig. 5.8(a) and (b), where we plot both ∆H at f 0 = 10 GHz and Gilbert damping α
for sample B as function of T/Tc . We find that ∆H increases, while α is reduced
below Tc . Hence we do also observe changes in ∆H ( T ) in the superconducting
(a )

8 .5

6 .0

8 .0

5 .8

5 .6

(b )

α( 1 0 -3 )

µ 0 ∆H

(m T )

6 .2

f0 = 1 0 G H z
0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

1 .5

0 .5

1 .0

1 .5

T /T c

Fig. 5.8. – (a) FMR linewidth ∆H at f 0 = 10 GHz as function of reduced temperature for
sample B. (b) Gilbert damping α of sample B as function of reduced temperature.

state in agreement to the changes observed by Jeon et al. (cf. Fig. 5.8), but differ
in the interpretation of this result. We attribute the reduction of α in Fig. 5.8(b)
to the SC blocking spin currents in agreement with Ref. [256], whereas Jeon et
al. [49, 274] attribute the increasing ∆H ( T ) in the superconducting state to an
enhanced spin pumping contribution mediated by spin-triplet Cooper pairs. In
sample C, the slight reduction of α below Tc in Fig. 5.7(b) results from the blocking
of spin currents at the NbN/Pt-interface, whereas for sample D it is attributed to
the SC shunting effect reducing the dissipation of angular momentum generated
by the iSHE in the Pt layer. Even below Tc , the values for α of both samples C
and D remain substantially larger than that of the reference sample A as the spin
pumping at the Py/Pt-interface is not affected by the superconducting NbN on
the other side of the Pt layer.
To summarize our results of Fig. 5.7, we observe in σd a shunting effect of
the superconducting layer and evidence for the quasiparticle-mediated iSHE,
which corroborates a recent report [47]. The reduced Gilbert damping in the
superconducting state demonstrates that spin current transport through the SC in
FM/SC/Pt-heterostructures is blocked below Tc in agreement with the findings
in Ref. [256], while the spin pumping in FM/Pt/SC layers is only weakly affected
by the SC transition. The direct detection of dissipative spin currents via SOT in
Fig. 5.7(a) is thus consistent with their indirect detection via FMR damping α in
5.7(b).
Apart from the damping-like σd , originating from the iSHE, we can simultaneously extract σf generated by Faraday currents and field-like inverse spin orbit

5.2 Spin torques in NbN/Py-heterostructures

81

torques in both the normal- and superconducting state. We plot the extracted σf
for our samples in Fig. 5.9(a). Above Tc , we detect negative values for samples B, C
6 0

(a )

(b )

σf ( 1 0 5 / Ωm )

3
L F (fH )

3 0

A

~

B

0

0
C

-3

D
0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

1 .5

0 .5

1 .0

1 .5

T /T c

Fig. 5.9. – (a) Field-like spin torque conductivity σf plotted as a function of T/Tc . Due
to a complex surface impedance Zeff (ω ) in the SC, the Faraday contribution σfF creates
an offset in Im( L̃) and only affects σf above Tc . (b) Change in Im( L̃) in the SC state due
to SC Faraday currents labeled L̃F . The error bars in (a) & (b) originate from fitting the
extracted raw data for ( L̃) with Eq. (5.14).

and D, attributed to sizable Faraday currents in Pt in agreement with the findings
by Berger et al. [84] as well as a small positive σf for sample A, which indicates
a small iREE manifesting in the NbN/Py-interface in the normal state. In the
superconducting state, all samples exhibit a substantial positive field-like σf that
gradually increases with decreasing T. Furthermore, we find that the observed behavior of all samples is nearly independent of the inclusion and position of the Pt
layer. For T < Tc , Faraday currents in the SC do not contribute to the slope of Re( L̃)
(and thus σf ) but generate an offset L̃F in Im( L̃) [see Eq. (5.14)]. This extracted
offset is plotted as function of reduced temperature in Fig. 5.9(b). Consequently,
the similar magnitudes in σf ( T ) of our samples below Tc can be understood as
in the superconducting state, the Faraday currents manifest themselves in L̃F , as
the superconductor acts as an inductor instead of as a resistor [see Eq. 5.12]. In
Fig. 5.9, the magnitudes in L̃F are similar for all samples, which is expected as they
all contain NbN with nominally the same layer thickness. Furthermore, we note
that the positive σf for T < Tc in Fig. 5.9(a) exhibits the opposite sign compared to
that expected from Faraday currents [84]. The observed sizable σf for T 7→ 0 K can
also neither be attributed to the inverse Rashba-Edelstein effect [37, 38] nor the
electromagnetic proximity effect [333,334] at the SC/FM-interface, as the observed
phenomenon is seemingly independent of the materials interfacing the superconductor and does also not require a direct contact between SC and FM layer. Having
ruled out the common sources of field-like current-induced torques, we can merely
speculate about its origin in our samples. Potential candidates to generate σf in
these samples are the coherent motion of vortices in an rf-field [335, 336] as well
as the impact of Meißner screening currents on the magnetization dynamics due
to either spin-triplet superconductivity [274] or non equilibrium effects [337].

82

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

To summarize our initial study [68], we have adapted the inductive detection method introduced in Ref. [84] to study the field-like- and the reduction of
damping-like current-induced torques in FM/SC hybrids below Tc . Our observations on the damping-like current-induced torques are consistent with a shunting
effect of the SC and quasiparticle-mediated iSHE in NbN [47]. Notably, the spin
transport into superconductors is mediated predominantly by quasiparticles in
our heterostructures and we find, that features in the FMR-linewidth ∆H associated with spin-triplet superconductivity in Refs. [49, 274] can result from the
increased inhomogeneous linewidth broadening Hinh in the superconducting state.
Hence a careful study of ∆H as function of frequency is required to study the spin
transport in superconductors. The observed sizable field-like current-induced
torque below Tc does not originate from Faraday currents or interfacial inverse
spin torques. This still unexplained observation raises interesting questions regarding the theoretical understanding of spin current transport in FM/SC-hybrids.
The inductive analysis method established here enables the study of manifold
theoretically proposed exotic phenomena of SC/FM-hybrids like the generation
of supercurrents by Rashba-spin orbit interaction [37, 295], supercurrent-induced
spin orbit torques [299] or the theoretically proposed vortex spin Hall effect [276].
Notably, by using our method, these studies can be performed without any need
to pattern the samples.

5.3 Spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures
Our initial results on NbN/Py-heterostructures including Pt [68] reconcile
the seemingly contradictory effects of the works of Bell et al. [256] and Jeon et
al. [49] with the observation of the blocking of spin current transport through
superconductors in both α and σd . However, in an overview article on the field of
superconducting spintronics [268], authored by one of the co-authors of Ref. [49],
it was pointed out that the expected generation of spin-triplet Cooper pairs
by the exchange field in the Pt layer is expected to be hindered by the short
coherence length of NbN (ξ 0 ≃ 5 nm [257]) used in our case as compared to
the elementary Nb they have used (ξ 0 ≃ 30 nm [49]). While this argument may
be valid, we note that the investigated NbN/Pt/Py-heterostructure sample C in
Sec. 5.2 should have nonetheless enabled the generation and detection of spintriplets [68]. Nonetheless, we decided to further study the impact of spin-orbit
interaction in superconductors on their spin transport properties and repeated
our bbFMR experiments using a heavy spin-orbit interaction superconductor,
where its spin-orbit field should directly enable the generation of spin-triplets
without the need to additionally include a Pt layer in the sample stack. To
this end, we select the superconducting material TaN, motivated by the large
SOI induced by elementary Ta [44, 280] as well as its robustness to external
magnetic fields µ0 Hc2 ≃ 14 T [338] and experimentally accessible superconducting

5.3 Spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures

83

transition temperature Tc ≃ (8 − 10) K [338–341]. In a first step, we optimize
the growth of superconducting TaN thin films on SiO2 substrates via reactive
dc magnetron sputtering with regards to their superconducting properties in
Sec. 5.3.1. To investigate the impact of SOI on the inverse spin-torque conductivities
in SC/FM-hybrids, we then use this optimized deposition recipe and analyze
the magnetization dynamics of both normal state and superconducting TaN/Pybilayers as a function of temperature via broadband ferromagnetic resonance
spectroscopy in combination with the previously established inductive analysis
technique and compare the obtained results with our previous study on NbN/Pybilayers [68] in Sec. 5.3.2.

5.3.1 Growth optimization of TaN
In order to determine the optimum growth conditions of TaN, we deposit
60 nm thick TaN thin films on a thermally oxidized Si (100) substrates by reactive
dc magnetron sputtering in a mixed Ar/N2 -atmosphere using the Superbowls
sputtering machine (see Sec. 3.1.5) and systematically vary the deposition parameters listed in Sec. 3.1.2. To determine both the resistivity and the superconducting
transition temperature Tc of our TaN thin films, we perform 4-point electrical
transport measurements using the Van-der-Pauw method [226] as a function of
temperature in the range 3 K ≤ T ≤ 300 K using the 17T cryostat (see Sec. 3.3.1).
Exemplary data for the resistivity ρ as a function of temperature for our TaN thin
films is shown in Fig. 5.10(a).
Here, the gray dashed vertical line represents the extracted superconducting
transition temperature Tc = ( T1 + T2 )/2 as the mean value between the temperatures where ρ takes on 90% [ρ( T1 )/ρNC =90%] and 10% [ρ( T2 )/ρNC =10%] of its
normal state value ρNC at T = 7 K. This particular film has been grown at a gas
flow ratio N2 /Ar=0.35, a deposition temperature Tdepo = 500◦ C, a deposition pressure pdepo = 5 µbar, and a sputtering power P = 30 W, resulting in a superconducting transition temperature Tc = 4.97 K. The light blue background in Fig. 5.10(a)
represents the superconducting transition width ∆Tc = T1 − T2 = 1.26 K. Additionally, to gain insight into the chemical composition of our TaN thin films, we
perform x-ray reflectometry experiments (XRR) on them as exemplary displayed
in Fig. 5.10(b). By fitting the raw data for the detected x-ray intensity I using
the Leptos-fitting software utilizing a simulated annealing optimization procedure [342], we can extract both the layer thickness dSC and volume density DV
of our TaN thin films. In particular, the latter parameter provides insight into
the sample stoichiometry as the various Ta- and N-rich TaN1±δ phases exhibit
a different DV . In particular, volume densities DV < 13.0 g/cm3 are associated
with N-rich TaN1±δ phases, whereas TaN with volume densities in the range
(13.0 ≤ DV ≤ 14.7) g/cm3 are attributed the cubic TaN-phase (c-TaN) and Ta-rich
TaN1±δ phases exhibit a higher DV > 14.7 g/cm3 [300]. In literature, primarily the

84

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

D

I ( a r b . u n its )

1 0

T c

r

( µΩm )

T c

2 0 (a )

0
2

4

(b )

1 E + 0

ra w d a ta
s im u la tio n

1 E -2
1 E -4

6

1

2

T (K )
3

)

5 (c ) T depo= 5 0 0 °C
4

(g /c m

T c (K )

P depo= 3 0 W
p depo= 5 µ b a r

1 5 (d )

c -T a N

1 3

V

3

3

2 q (°)
T a - r ic h p h a s e s

N - r ic h p h a s e s
0 .4

D

0 .0

0 .2

0 .4
N

2 / A

0 .0

r

N
3

)

5 ( e ) N 2 /A r= 0 .3 5

(g /c m

T c (K )

P depo= 3 0 W
p depo= 5 µ b a r

4

0 .2

1 5 (f)

r
T a - r ic h p h a s e s
c -T a N

1 3

V

3

2 / A

N - r ic h p h a s e s
6 0 0
8 0 0

D

2 0 0

4 0 0

6 0 0

8 0 0

2 0 0

4 0 0

2 / A r = 0 . 3 5
T depo = 5 0 0 °C
p depo= 5 µ b a r

4

T d e p o ( °C )
T a - r ic h p h a s e s

1 5 (h )

c -T a N

1 3

V

3

3

N

(g /c m

T c (K )

5 (g )

)

T d e p o ( °C )

N - r ic h p h a s e s
6 0
8 0

D

2 0

4 0

6 0

8 0

2 0

2 / A r = 0 . 3 5
T depo = 5 0 0 °C
P depo= 3 0 W

4

T a - r ic h p h a s e s

1 5 (j)

c -T a N
1 3

3

D

V

3

3

N

(g /c m

T c (K )

5 (i)

P depo (W )
)

P depo (W )

4 0

5
p depo (µ b a r)

7

3

5

N - r ic h p h a s e s
7

p depo (µ b a r)

Fig. 5.10. – (a) Exemplary plot of the resistivity ρ versus temperature T of our TaN thin
films together with the extracted superconducting transition temperature Tc (vertical
dashed line) and transition width ∆Tc (blue region). (b) Exemplary x-ray reflectometry
data (black) and simulation curve (red) allowing to extract the volume density DV of the
TaN thin films. (c), (d) Superconducting transition temperature Tc and volume density DV
of the TaN thin films as a function of the N2 /Ar-flow ratio during deposition. (e), (f) Tc
and DV as a function of the deposition temperature Tdepo . (g), (h) Tc and DV as a function
of the deposition power Pdepo . (i), (j) Tc and DV as a function of the deposition pressure
pdepo . Within each series, the sample with the highest Tc is highlighted with a star symbol.
Samples not showing full superconductivity above T = 3 K are represented by red arrows
in panels (c), (e) (g) and (i) as well as red squares in panels (d), (f) (h) and (j).

5.3 Spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures

85

cubic c-TaN-phase is expected to give rise to superconductivity [340]. Note that
in the fabricated films, these three principal phases may be present in parallel,
with varying volume fractions, since in our experiments we only can determine
the average volume density. However, we can expect a high fraction of our thin
films to be in the TaN phase corresponding to the measured DV . For all the
TaN thin films grown in our optimization study, we observe superconducting
transition widths in the range ∆Tc ≃ 1 K with no systematic dependence on the
respective deposition parameters (see Appendix E). This broad transition range
indicates the presence of a mixture of TaN1±δ -phases in our thin films. Additional
x-ray diffraction experiments on the TaN on SiO2 samples exhibited no detectable
crystalline reflections. For the XRR spectra of the TaN thin film in Fig. 5.10(b),
we find a layer thickness dTaN ≈ 64 nm and DV ≈ 13.8 g/cm3 in agreement with
the expected density for cubic TaN [300]. From our XRR experiments, we find
that the layer thicknesses dTaN of all samples in our growth optimization range
between 54 nm and 66 nm, which greatly exceeds the superconducting coherence
length of TaN ξ 0 ≃ 9 nm [343]. In this range of layer thicknesses, we hence expect
that the small fluctuation in dTaN among the samples does not affect Tc . The
respective deposition parameters, superconducting transition temperatures Tc ,
transition widths ∆Tc , and volume densities DV for all the TaN films deposited
in the growth optimization study are listed in Appendix E. As a first growth
optimization parameter, we vary the N2 /Ar gas flow ratios during deposition
and deposit TaN-films at a deposition temperature of Tdepo = 500◦ C and a total
pressure of p = 5 µbar, a deposition power of PDepo = 30 W. The resulting Tc as
function of N2 /Ar gas flow ratio is plotted in Fig. 5.10(c). We exclusively find
Tc > 3 K for gas flow ratios in the range (0.25 ≤ N2 /Ar ≤ 0.45). Samples that
did not exhibit full superconductivity above T = 3 K are displayed by red arrows
Fig. 5.10(c). For this initial step of our optimization series, we find a maximum of
Tc = 4.97 K at a gas flow ratio of N2 /Ar = 0.35. Notably, this ratio is significantly
higher compared to reports in literature [338–340, 344], where the maxima in the
Tc at gas flow ratios in the range (0.1 ≤ N2 /Ar ≤ 0.15). This difference can have
various reasons such as a different distance between target and substrate in the
Superbowls sputtering machine as well as different values of the kinetic energy of
the Ta-atoms during the sputtering process due to varying sputtering power P
and target bias voltage. The volume density DV of the TaN thin films grown in
this series are plotted as function of the N2 /Ar gas flow ratio in Fig. 5.10(d). We
identify three principal regimes with different TaN1±δ stoichiometry in agreement
with Ref. [300]. In particular, we find that the DV of the non-superconducting
TaN thin films for low and high N2 -concentration correspond to the expected
volume densities of Ta- and N-rich phases, respectively. The intermediate range
(13.0 ≤ DV ≤ 14.7) g/cm3 is attributed to the cubic TaN-phase (c-TaN) [300].
Having identified an optimal N2 /Ar gas flow ratio of 0.35 in the first step of our
growth optimization series, we next vary the sample temperature during deposi-

86

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

tion Tdepo of TaN films grown at a deposition power of Pdepo = 30 W, a deposition
pressure of pdepo = 5 µbar, and N2 /Ar=0.35. The resulting Tc as function of Tdepo
is plotted in Fig. 5.10(e). We find that superconducting TaN thin films with a
Tc > 3 K are obtained only for elevated deposition temperatures Tdepo > 400◦ C.
The volume density DV plotted in Fig. 5.10(f) suggests that this threshold in Tdepo
coincides with the transition of our samples from the N-rich TaN1±δ -phase to the
c-TaN phase, suggesting, that a finite Tdepo is required to enable the growth of TaN
on the substrate in the energetically preferable c-TaN-phase. For Tdepo > 500◦ C,
we observe no systematic changes in Tc with Tdepo and hence chose to proceed our
growth optimization with Tdepo = 500◦ C as this parameter yielded the highest Tc
and to avoid the thermally induced breaking of molecular nitrogen bonds [175].
For the next optimization step, we vary the deposition power Pdepo using the
optimized Tdepo = 500◦ C, N2/Ar=0.35 and a deposition pressure pdepo = 5 µbar.
The resulting Tc and DV as function of Pdepo are plotted in Fig. 5.10(g) and (h).
We find that only two TaN thin films deposited in the intermediate power range
30 W ≤ Pdepo ≤ 45 W exhibit a Tc > 3 K. The volume density DV of these two
films in Fig. 5.10(h) is situated within the expected density range for cubic TaN
and we observe a continuous rise in DV with increasing Pdepo due to the enhanced
removal rate of elementary Ta from the target surface at a fixed nitrogen concentration and consequently the growth of TaN in the Ta-rich phase. From our
deposition power series, we find an optimal Tc for Pdepo = 30 W. As the last step
of our optimization series, we study the effect of the deposition pressure pdepo on
our growth process and deposit TaN at N2 /Ar=0.35, Tdepo = 500◦ C, Pdepo = 30 W,
while varying pdepo . We again plot the superconducting Tc and volume density
DV as a function of deposition pressure in Fig. 5.10(i) and (j). We observe nearly
constant Tc and DV for deposition pressures pdepo ≤ 5 µbar. At pdepo = 7 µbar,
the reduced Tc and DV indicate the preferred growth of N-rich TaN1±δ phases
resulting from their increased mean free path in the sputtering plasma [167],
which becomes prominent at high deposition pressures. An optimum in Tc is
observed at pdepo = 5 µbar. In summary, our optimal deposition parameters for
superconducting cubic c-TaN are: N2 /Ar=0.35, Tdepo = 500◦ C, Pdepo = 30 W and
pdepo = 5 µbar resulting in a maximum Tc = 4.97 K as listed in the appendix B1.
We note that this maximum Tc value is comparable to literature values for
TaN grown on SiO2 in Ref. [341], where Tc = 6 K has been achieved for c-TaN
films grown via infrared pulsed laser deposition. However, TaN is known to
exhibit higher superconducting transition temperatures of up to Tc = 10.2 K on
crystalline substrates such as Al2O3(sapphire) [338,339] and MgO [340,341], where
films with a better texture can be achieved. To determine the optimal Tc of our
thin films, we deposit a 60 nm thick TaN layer on a c-plane sapphire substrate
using our optimized growth recipe (N2 /Ar=0.35, Tdepo = 500◦ C, Pdepo = 30 W
and pdepo = 5 µbar). The resistivity of this thin film is plotted in Fig. 5.11(a).

5.3 Spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures

87

1 0 6

3 0
(a )

A l2 O 3
(0 0 6 )

(b )

1 0 5

D

1 0

I ( a r b . u n its )

r

( µΩm )

2 0
T c

0
6

T (K )

8

1 0 3

T a N
(1 1 1 )

1 0

2

T a N
(0 0 2 )

1 0 1

T c
4

1 0 4

1 0

1 0 0

3 0

3 5

2 q (°)

4 0

4 5

Fig. 5.11. – Resistive transition ρ( T ) (a) and x-ray-diffraction pattern (b) of a 60 nm thick
TaN film grown on a c-plane Al2O3-substrate. The gray dashed line in panel (a) indicates
the superconducting Tc = 7.72 K and the red arrow and blue background represent the
superconducting transition width ∆Tc = 0.56 K.

We observe a superconducting transition at Tc = 7.72 K, which is almost 3 K
higher as well as a narrower transition width of ∆Tc = 0.56 K compared to TaN
grown on SiO2. Furthermore, in x-ray diffraction experiments in Fig. 5.11(b), we
observe the (111) and (002) reflections of the cubic c-TaN phase [341, 345]. These
results demonstrate a strong correlation between crystalline quality and high Tc in
our samples. Our observed optimum Tc = 7.72 K on sapphire is still ≃ 2 K lower
compared to Refs. [338, 339] but comparable to the results in Ref. [340, 341]. We
attribute this variation to the different crystalline quality of the TaN thin films
grown with varying deposition methods and the limited capabilities of reactive
sputter deposition in this regard. We note, however, that the achieved Tc = 4.97 K
of TaN on SiO2 is sufficient to compare the inverse spin torques of superconducting
TaN in TaN/Py-heterostructures to our results of NbN/Py-heterostructures from
the previous section 5.2.
Regarding the net resistivity values of our TaN thin films grown for different deposition parameters, we have observed a large spread in ρ between
the individual thin films (cf. Ref. [162]). We attribute this to the different measurement geometries of our TaN thin films as we did not pattern them into a
specific geometry to save time and simply performed 4-point measurements in
Van-der-Pauw-geometry. However, we can identify the different TaN1±δ -phases
from the temperature evolution of ρ( T ). This is exemplified in Fig. 5.12, where we
plot the resistivity of three TaN thin films of the N2 /Ar-gas flow series grown in
the Ta-rich phase at N2 /Ar=0.20 (red dots), the N-rich phase N2 /Ar=0.50 (blue
dots) and in the c-TaN-phase at N2 /Ar=0.35 (black dots) at using the deposition
parameters Tdepo = 500◦ C, Pdepo = 30 W and pdepo = 5 µbar.
For the sample in the N-rich TaN1±δ -phase, we observe in Fig. 5.12 an increasing ρ with decreasing T, which is commonly associated with variable range
hopping (VRH) [346, 347] in disordered systems due to the semiconducting properties of N-rich TaN phases [348]. We fit the measured ρ( T ) with a VRH function

88

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

1 0 3

6

(a )

(b )

N - r ic h p h a s e s

Ι

ΙΙ

ΙΙΙ

1 0 1

T C [K ]

T a - r ic h p h a s e s
c -T a N

r

( µ Ωm )

1 0 2

4

1 0 0
2 0 K
1 0 -1

3 0 0 K

1 0

0

1 0 0

2

4

6

8

R R R

T (K )

Fig. 5.12. – (a) Resistivity ρ as a function of temperature T for TaN thin films grown in the
N-rich (blue), Ta-rich (red) and c-TaN phase in the range from cryogenic temperatures to
1/4
RT. The violet line represents a fit to the VRH
and the dark
 model ρ( T ) = ρ0 exp( T0 /T )
blue line is a fit to to ρ = ρ0 exp Eg /2kB T . Dashed gray lines mark the temperatures 20 K
and 300 K. (b) Superconducting transition temperature of our TaN thin films as function of
their RRR-ratio [RRR=ρ(20 K)/ρ(300 K)]. The roman numbers indicate the different TaN
phases. The Ta-rich and N-rich phases are represented by the ranges I and III, respectively.
The superconducting TaN thin films grown in the c-TaN phase in range II for the range
(1.2 ≤ RRR ≤ 2.7) are highlighted with a blue background.
M o d e ll

G le ic h u n g
Z e ic h n e n

V R H (U s e r)

A * e x p ((B /x )^ (C ))
F

A

6 2 .8 9 3 5 9 5 5 8 4 1 4 7 7 2 5 2 1 9 2 8 ±
1 .3 4 3 6 4 5 7 3 3 5 4 6 8 0 5 7 2 0 5 9

B

3 7 .2 2 3 0 6 5 6 7 6 2 6 3 4 7 3 7 3 3 3 4 ±
2 .4 4 3 5 4 7 4 5 3 8 6 6 9 4 2 8 3 1 2 7

C

0 .2 5 ± 0

C h i-Q u a d r R e d u z ie rt

2 4 6 6 .9 3 9 2 2 1 1 2 0 4 9 4 9 4 8 9 9 1 1
1

R -Q u a d ra t (C O D )

0 .7 0 3 1 4 7 2 9 3 2 5 9 7 1 0 8 1 4 9 7

K o r. R -Q u a d ra t

0 .7 0 2 9 3 1 5 5 7 2 8 0 9 7 5 1 1 6 7



ρ( T ) = C exp ( T0 /T )1/4 [346, 347][see purple line in Fig. 5.12(a)] and extract
C = 63 ± 2 µΩm and T0 = 37 ± 2 K. Though these fitting parameters are situated
within the expected range of values for disordered semiconductors [349, 350], we
find, that the VRH model does not properly describe the observed temperature
dependence in ρ( T ) for the N-rich TaN1±δ -sample over the entire temperature
range. However, we achieve a good fit using an Arrhenius function of the form
ρ( T ) = ρ0 exp( Eg /2kB T ) [351, 352] [see blue line in Fig. 5.12(a)], where Eg is the
energy of the semiconducting bandgap and ρ0 is the resistance in the intrinsic
conduction limit, and extract a low bandgap of Eg ≈ (9.0 ± 0.1) meV. The increasingly insulating properties with rising N2 /Ar-gas flow ratio during deposition
is confirmed in Ref. [162]. For the TaN thin film grown in the Ta-rich phase
(red data points), we observe in Fig. 5.12(a) a weak temperature dependence in
the resistivity demonstrating its enhanced metallic character. Finally, for the
resistivity of the TaN thin film grown in the c-TaN phase, we observe a slight
rise in ρ( T ) with reduced temperatures, which is however weaker than for the
TaN thin film grown in the N-rich phase, and the onset of the superconducting
phase for temperatures below 5 K. The different temperature evolution in ρ( T )
for the three thin films in Fig. 5.12(a) indicates, that the different TaN1±δ -phases
exhibit a characteristic behavior in ρ( T ). To test this hypothesis, we determine the
RRR-ratio of our TaN thin films defined as RRR=ρ(20 K)/ρ(300 K). In Fig. 5.12(b),
we plot the superconducting Tc of all TaN thin films grown for the optimization
study as a function of the RRR-ratio. We can clearly identify the three different
TaN1±δ -phases: (I) the Ta-rich phase for RRR< 1.2, (II) the c-TaN phase, containing
the superconducting samples with a Tc > 3 K, in the range 1.2 ≤ RRR ≤ 2.7 and

5.3 Spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures

89

(III) the N-rich phase for RRR> 2.7. The TaN thin film grown with our optimized
recipe is situated in the middle of the superconducting region at RRR≈ 1.8. The
observed RRR-range of the c-TaN phase is in agreement with literature [338, 341].
Hence, the observed electrical transport properties of our samples allows to clearly
identify the three main phases of TaN.
To confirm the robustness of our TaN thin films to an in-plane external
magnetic field µ0 Hext ≃ 1 T, required for our bbFMR experiments in the (1050) GHz frequency-range, we analyze the magnetic field dependence of their
superconducting transition temperature Tc . To this end, we study the resistivity ρ
as a function temperature for our optimized TaN thin film (N2 /Ar=0.35, Tdepo =
500◦ C, Pdepo = 30 W and pdepo = 5 µbar) grown on SiO2 for fixed in-plane
magnetic fields in the range 0 T ≤ µ0 Hext ≤ 12 T. The resulting ρ( T ) curves for
varying µ0 Hext are shown in Fig. 5.13(a). We observe a reduction in Tc as well as
an increase of the superconducting transition width ∆Tc with increasing µ0 Hext .
(a )

(b )

1 5

T c

2 0

c 2

(T )

1 2 T
6 T

3 T

0 T

µ 0H

9 T

r

( µ Ωm )

T ce x p o

5
µ 0H
0
2

4

6
T (K )

0 .0

c 2 ( 0

)= (1 3 .8 ± 0 .1 )T
0 .5
T /T c

1 .0

Fig. 5.13. – (a) Resistivity ρ as a function of temperature T of the optimally grown TaN
on SiO2 thin film for varying external in-plane magnetic fields µ0 Hext . (b) Extracted
critical field µ0 Hc2 ( T ) (black and blue dots) as a function of reduced temperature T/Tc
together with a fit to µ0 Hc2 ( T ) using Eq. (5.22). The blue data points represent the linearly
extrapolated Tc for high external magnetic fields, where the TaN thin film did not exhibit
full superconductivity within the experimentally accessible temperature range.

In Fig. 5.13(b) we plot the applied in-plane field µ0 Hext interpreted in this
context as the superconducting critical field Hc2 as function of the normalized
temperature Tc (µ0 Hext )/Tc (0). Here, we note, that this direct relation between
Hext and Hc2 is only a rough estimate, as it is impossible in our experiments to align
the thin film normal of our sample exactly along the applied external magnetic
field and consequently the field-induced motion of superconducting vortices may
give rise to a resistive transition below the true Hc2 of the superconductor. For
external fields µ0 Hext > 9 T, the Tc are in the temperature regime below the lowest
experimentally accessible temperature. Here, we to obtain their estimate values
by performing a linear extrapolation. The thereby estimated Tc are represented in
Fig. 5.13(b) as light blue dots. To obtain an estimate for the upper critical field Hc2

90

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

of our TaN thin films, we fit the data for µ0 Hc2 ( T ) in Fig. 5.13(b) to the empirical
dependence [86]
"
µ0 Hc2 ( T ) = µ0 Hc2 ( T = 0 K) 1 −



T
Tc

2 #
,

(5.22)

and find µ0 Hc2 ( T = 0 K) = (13.8 ± 0.1) T. This value is in good agreement with
the literature value µ0 Hc2 = 14 T reported in Ref. [338] for TaN grown on sapphire
substrates demonstrating the state-of-the-art robustness to external magnetic fields
in the experimentally accessible T-range and thereby the excellent suitability for
bbFMR experiments of our TaN thin films.

5.3.2 Broadband ferromagnetic resonance
Having found an optimal growth recipe for superconducting TaN on SiO2 and
demonstrated its robustness to external in-plane magnetic fields in the 1 T-range,
we fabricate SC/FM heterostructures using TaN and repeat the measurement
procedure performed for NbN/Py-heterostructures in Sec. 5.2. To this end, we
in situ deposit 6 nm of Py on 60 nm thick TaN films grown on SiO2. The Py
layer is again covered with a protective TaOx cap layer to avoid oxidization.
For this study, we characterize two TaN/Py-bilayer structures: (i) sample E is
a TaN/Py bilayer, where the TaN layer is grown using the optimal deposition
parameters (N2 /Ar=0.35, Tdepo = 500◦ C, Pdepo = 30 W and pdepo = 5 µbar)
and (ii) sample F is a TaN/Py bilayer where the growth parameters of TaN
(N2 /Ar=0.1, Tdepo = 500◦ C, Pdepo = 30 W and pdepo = 5 µbar) are chosen such
that it doesn’t exhibit a superconducting transition in the experimentally studied
temperature range. The difference in the growth parameters of samples E and
F is the lower N2 /Ar gas flow ratio in sample F, which favors the formation of
non-superconducting Ta-rich TaN1±δ phases. Sample F can hence be viewed as
the reference sample allowing us to verify whether the experimentally observed
signatures in our bbFMR experiments can be assigned to the formation of a
superconducting phase in the TaN.
The resistivities ρ of samples E and F using the Van-der-Pauw method as
function of temperature are shown in Fig. 5.14.
For sample E, we find a superconducting Tc =4.7 K, demonstrating, that the
superconducting properties of TaN are only weakly affected by the ferromagnetic
exchange interaction at the TaN/Py-interface. As expected, for sample F, we
observe no superconducting transition in the investigated temperature range. We
find a RRR ratio of RRR= 0.94 and 0.91 for samples E and F, respectively. We
attribute the RRR< 1 in our bilayers to the fractional charge transport in the Py
layer, where a reduced resistivity at cryogenic temperatures has been observed in
Ref. [353]. The lower ρ in sample F compared to sample E is attributed to its more
metallic character due to its higher Ta-content. By modelling the TaN/Py-bilayer

5.3 Spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures

91

1 0 1
E

r

( µ Ωm )

F

1 0 0

T c

2 0 K

3 0 0 K

1 0

1 0 0

T (K )
Fig. 5.14. – Resistivity ρ of the TaN/Py bilayers E and F as a function of temperature
T in the range from cryogenic temperatures to RT. The dark blue line represents the
superconducting Tc , whereas gray dashed lines indicate the temperatures 20 K and 300 K.
Tc =4.7 K is observed for sample E, whereas sample F remains in the normal state in the
investigated temperature range.

as a parallel resistor network and assuming the resistance of the c-TaN thin film
in sample E to be ρTaN ≈ 28 µΩm at cryogenic temperatures (see Fig. 5.13), we
can estimate the resistivity of the Py layer to be ρPy ≈ 12 µΩm. This value is an
order of magnitude higher compared to literature values [353] due to the relative
uncertainty in the determination of the sheet resistance of the used Van-der-Pauw
method. We can however state, that the resistivity of the Py layer is lower than
that of the TaN layer and hence shunting effects of the iSHE can manifest in the
used TaN/Py-bilayers.
In analogy to Sec. 5.2, we perform bbFMR
experiments on the samples E and F in the ipJciSHE
geometry Hext k a in Fig. 3.4(b) and characterTaN
Js
H iSHE
ize both their magnetization dynamics parameJs
m
ters and spin-torque conductivities as function
Heﬀ
Py
of temperature using the Chaos cryostat (see
CPW
Sec. 3.3.1). Again, we use the frequency range
Fig. 5.15. – Schematic illustra- (10 GHz ≤ f ≤ 36 GHz) and record the complex
tion for the generation of the microwave transmission parameter S of the CPW
21
charge current density JciSHE by
with
the
mounted
samples
as
function
of the exthe ac iSHE in the normal state
in samples E and F. The ac flux ternal magnetic field Hext at a microwave power
ΦiSHE ∝ HiSHE generated by of 1 mW corresponding to the linear regime. As
JciSHE is coupled into the CPW.
Note, that in this figure, the as- the TaN layer in the normal state exhibits a large
pect ratio between sample thick- spin-orbit interaction, the physics at play in samness and center conductor width ples E and F is in analogy to that of sample B
of the CPW is distorted.
in Sec. 5.2 illustrated in Fig. 5.3 with the only difference being, that in this case, the SC layer also

92

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

simultaneously serves as the spin sink layer as shown in Fig. 5.15. The magnetization dynamics excited in the Py layer pumps a spin current density Js into the
adjacent TaN layer,where it is absorbed and converted into a charge current JciSHE
via the iSHE. On the one hand, this process manifests itself as an additional contribution to the Gilbert damping α of the FMR [85] and, on the other hand, in the
frequency-dependence of the inductive coupling between sample and CPW [84].
The resulting magnetization dynamics parameters consisting of g-factor,
oop
effective magnetization Meff , out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy field Hani and inhomogeneous line broadening Hinh of the two TaN/Py-samples E and F recorded
at cryogenic temperatures are plotted as a function of the reduced temperature
in Fig. 5.16. As sample F does not exhibit superconductivity within the experimentally investigated temperature-range, we divide the T of the data points for
this sample to the Tc of sample E. We plot the magnetization dynamics parameters and inverse spin torque conductivities of samples E and F as a function
of reduced temperature to allow for their comparison with the results for the
NbN/Py-heterostructures in Sec. 5.2.
2 .1 2
(b )

e ff ( T

2 .1 0
F

1 .0

µ 0M

g

)

(a )

E
0 .8
2 .0 8
(c )

(d )
1 .0
(m T )

1

µ 0H

µ 0H

in h

a n i ( m T )

3

0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

0 .5

0 .0

0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

Fig. 5.16. – Temperature dependence of the magnetization dynamics parameters for the
TaN/Py samples E and F. Both the g-factor in (a) and the effective magnetization Meff in (b)
exhibit no changes in the superconducting state. (c) The out-of-plane magnetic anisotropy
oop
field Hani of sample E increases due to a magnetic out-of-plane field contribution from
the induced Meissner fields in the superconducting state. (d) Inhomogeneous broadening
Hinh as function of reduced temperature.

We find, that just like for our NbN/Py-heterostructures, the g-factor and
effective magnetization Meff in Fig. 5.16 panels (a) and (b) are comparable for both
samples unaffected by the onset of superconductivity in sample E. The values

5.3 Spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures

93

for Meff and g-factor for samples E and F are comparable to those of samples
A-D demonstrating the growth of Py on both TaN and NbN with equally good
properties in the absence of in-plane anisotropy contributions (Meff = Ms ). For
oop
the out-of-plane anisotropy field Hani in Fig. 5.16(c), we observe positive values in
the mT-range in particular for sample E. While it is tempting to again attribute
oop
this Hani to the presence of spin-orbit interaction in analogy to samples C and D,
oop
the different magnitude of Hani in samples E and F indicates the presence of an
additional oop anisotropy contribution. We suspect the manifestation of a small
magnetocrystalline anisotropy (see Sec. 2.1) from a crystalline texturing of our thin
oop
films. The varying magnitude in Hani can then be understood as the Ta-rich TaN
in sample F primarily crystallizes in the hexagonal Ta5N6-phase [354], whereas the
superconducting TaN in sample E crystallizes in the cubic c-TaN phase. For sample
oop
E, in the superconducting state, a small increase in Hani is observed comparable
in magnitude to what has been observed for samples A, B and D in Fig. 5.16(c)
despite the larger layer thickness of the superconductor in sample E. This finding
appears to indicate that additional mechanisms to the superconducting Meißner
oop
currents must contribute to Hani in the SC/FM/SC-trilayers in Refs. [287, 316],
where shifts of the Kittel mode in the ≃ 100 mT range have been observed. In
a recent work [355], Mikhail Silaev has postulated that the Anderson-Higgs
mechanism mediated by Meißner currents in SC/FM/SC-trilayers generate a mass
for the magnons in the sandwiched FM layer and thereby a spectrum gap in
the magnons, which manifests as a shift in the Kittel mode. As this mechanism
requires SC/FM/SC-trilayer heterostructures, it represents a plausible scenario
oop
as to why no significant Hani are observed in our samples even when using
samples with thick superconducting layers and sizable Meißner currents. Finally,
for the inhomogeneous linewidth broadening Hinh plotted in Fig. 5.16(d), we
observe a small Hinh in the normal state for both samples and a slight increase
for sample E in the superconducting state in agreement to our results for samples
A-D in Fig. 5.5(d). Overall, the magnetization dynamics parameters for our two
TaN/Py-heterostructures in Fig. 5.16 are comparable to those of the four studied
NbN/Py-heterostructures in Fig. 5.5. Furthermore, sample E exhibits the same
oop
characteristic changes in Hani and Hinh , demonstrating the universality of these
effects for all superconducting materials in SC/FM-heterostructures.
Having studied the temperature dependence of the magnetization dynamics
parameters of the two TaN/Py bilayer samples E and F, we now discuss their
extracted inverse damping-like and field-like current-induced torques σd and σf ,
which are plotted in Figs. 5.17 and 5.19, respectively. Again, we have chosen to
plot the Gilbert damping parameter α together with σd as both parameters are
associated with spin transport at the TaN/Py-interface.
In Fig. 5.17(a), we observe a sizable positive and temperature-independent
σd for both samples E and F in the normal state. This contribution comprises
the combined iSHE effects of both the Py and TaN layers in our samples. We

94

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

F

(a )
1

(b )

E

8 .5

α( 1 0 -3 )

σd ( 1 0 5 / Ωm )

E
0

F

-1
8 .0
-2

0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

Fig. 5.17. – (a) Damping-like spin torque conductivity σd plotted as a function of T/Tc .
A positive σd is detected in both samples in the normal state. In the SC state, the σd
of sample A decays to negative values. (b) Gilbert damping parameter α for both the
superconducting (light blue, E) and normalconducting (dark red, F) TaN/Py-bilayers. The
apparent decrease of α in the SC state is due to the suppression of spin pumping into the
SC due to the freeze-out of thermally excited quasiparticles. The error bars originate from
fitting the extracted raw data for L̃ with Eq. (5.14) (a) and Eq. (2.27) for ∆H ( f ) (b).

have previously observed similar positive σd for the NbN/Py-bilayer sample A in
Sec. 5.2 despite the negative spin Hall angle in NbN [47, 279]. Hence, we assume,
that the contribution of Py to σd dominates due to the higher conductivity of the Py
layer and we can not quantify the magnitude of the spin Hall angle of TaN in the
normal state. However, we can state that the various TaN phases exhibit different
SHA as evident from the larger positive σd of sample F containing primarily Ta-rich
phases like Ta2 N. In a recent work, a negative spin Hall angle of ΘSH = −0.039
has been found for superconducting c-TaN at room temperature by Swatek et
al. [356]. From the calculated band structure of TaN using density functional
theory calculations, they further claim, that the spin Hall effect in TaN stems
primarily from intrinsic effects from gapless Dirac nodes and high-degeneracy
points along high-symmetry k-points in the bandstructure, which are absent in
pure Ta. In this light, the reduced positive σd of sample E can be attributed to a
negative contribution of c-TaN due to its negative spin Hall angle compared to the
TaN of sample F grown in the Ta-rich phase, which is hence expected to exhibit
a ΘSH with a lower magnitude. In the superconducting state, the σd of sample
E first decreases towards approximately zero with decreasing temperature due
to a superconducting shunting effect of the TaN layer as previously detected in
Sec. 5.2 and takes negative values with a rising magnitude for lower temperatures
in agreement with the quasiparticle mediated inverse spin Hall effect (QMiSHE)
[68, 357] due to the negative spin Hall angle of c-TaN [356]. Notably, the σd of
sample F remains constant for all experimentally investigated temperatures and
the observed behavior in σd of sample E can hence be unambiguously attributed
to the onset of superconductivity in TaN. We attribute the abrupt increase in
magnitude of the negative σd for T ≤ 2.75 K to a non-uniform superconducting
transition of the TaN layer, with its fraction, that is in contact with the Py layer

5.3 Spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures

95

transitioning only for temperatures below 2.75 K. This is supported by analyzing
the net inductive coupling between FM and CPW in the presence of Meißner
currents in Fig. 5.18, where we plot the enhancement of L̃0 of sample E as a
function of reduced temperature.

T c= 4 .7 K

2 .5 K < T c2 < 2 .7 5 K

6 0
2

 n s

~

L 0 (fH )

8 0

4 0

2 0

2

3

4

5

6

T (K )

Fig. 5.18. – Offset of the real part of the reduced inductive coupling between sample and
CPW L̃0 together with the BCS superconducting Cooper pair density n2s as a function of
temperature T. In the SC state, Meißner currents mirror the net oscillatory driving field
hrf of the CPW. A second SC transition at (2.5 < Tc2 < 2.75) K becomes apparent in the
abrupt further enhancement of L̃0 below 2.75 K.

We observe in Fig. 5.18 a very good agreement between n2s ( T ) and L̃0 ( T ) as
compared to the NbN/Py-heterostructures in Fig. 5.6(a), where we had attributed
the observed disparity between n2s ( T ) and L̃0 ( T ) due to a contribution of the large
kinetic inductance Lk ∝ λ2L in NbN. As TaN is expected to have a smaller London
penetration depth compared to NbN ( λL ≃ 20 nm [343]), the contribution of Lk to
L̃0 is much weaker in Fig. 5.18 and we hence observe a good agreement between
raw data and theory prediction. Below T ≤ 2.75 K we observe an abrupt increase
in L̃0 attributed to the additional contribution of image currents by the fraction
of TaN, which is in direct contact to the FM layer. From its notable deviation
from the expected behavior following n2s ( T ), we can attribute this deviation to
a second SC transition of the TaN thin film. For (2.75 K < T < Tc ), we thus
assume that sample E does not exhibit a direct SC/FM-contact and hence we
predominantly observe the SC shunting effect of the iSHE in the Py/TaN-bilayer
in Fig. 5.17(a). For lower T, the entire TaN layer becomes superconducting and
the established direct SC/FM-contact enables the SC quasiparticles to contribute
to the spin transport via the QMiSHE. We note, that the direct contact of a SC to
a FM material can have a significant effect on the superconducting Tc [358–360].
Note, that in Sec. 5.2, the QMiSHE has only been observed for samples A-C, which
exhibit a direct contact (samples A and B) or close proximity (sample C) between
SC and FM and could be fully suppressed in sample D by the insertion of a thick
Pt spin-sink layer between the SC and FM. Hence, the interpretation of our results
is consistent with the results for the NbN/Py-heterostructures in Sec. 5.2.

96

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

Again, our results for σd can be directly compared to the Gilbert damping
parameter α of our TaN/Py-heterostructures , which is plotted in Fig. 5.17(b). In
the normal state, we observe a larger α for sample E than in sample F, which
is consistent with our previous assumption, that the cubic c-TaN in sample E
acts as a stronger spin sink layer with a larger ΘSH . For temperatures below the
superconducting Tc of sample E, α remains constant for sample F. In contrast for
sample E, α decreases towards lower temperatures at first gradually and then
below 2.75 K abruptly drops to a low fixed value of α = 8.2 · 10−3 . This reduction
in the α of sample E below Tc is in agreement with the results for the NbN/Pt/Pyheterostructure sample D in Fig. 5.7 of Sec. 5.2, where we have attributed the
reduction in α in the superconducting state to the superconducting shunting
effect of spin currents. Here, we note that as the spin transport by thermally
excited quasiparticles in the superconductor is expected to give rise to a decay
in α in a convex shape following the density of thermally excited quasiparticles
1 − ( T/Tc )4 [361] [see samples A and B in Fig. 5.17(b)], whereas for sample E α
decays in a concave shape, we attribute the reduction in α in sample E to the
non-uniform superconducting transition of its TaN layer and the superconducting
shunting effect rather than quasiparticle spin transport. From Fig. 5.17(b), we note
that a strong reduction in α with decreasing T from quasiparticle spin transport
manifests only for temperatures below 2.75 K, which corroborates our assumptions
of a second superconducting transition of the TaN fraction, that interfaces the Py
layer.
(a )

(b )
1 0

5

~

F

0 .5

L F (fH )

σf ( 1 0 5 / Ωm )

1 .0

E
0
0 .0

0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

Fig. 5.19. – (a) Field-like spin torque conductivity σf plotted as a function of T/Tc . We
observe a small positive σf for both samples in the normal state attributed to the iREE. In
the SC state, σf in sample E rises to large positive values. (b) Change in Im( L̃) in the SC
state due to SC Faraday currents labeled L̃F . The error bars in (a) & (b) originate from
fitting the extracted raw data for ( L̃) with Eq. (5.14). Magnetization dynamics parameters
and spin torque conductivities as function of reduced temperature.

In Fig. 5.19(a), we plot the extracted field-like inverse spin torque conductivity
σf as function of reduced temperature for samples E and F. We observe small
positive values in the normal state that are compatible with the iREE [37, 38],
as the Faraday effect would give rise to negative σf in the substrate/NM/FMstack sequence (sgn = +1) [84]. Similar σf values have been detected in Pt/Py-

5.3 Spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures

97

bilayers [84]. The higher magnitude in σF of sample F compared to sample E can
be understood from its higher conductivity in Fig. 5.14 via σF ∝ σint [84], where
σint is the conductivity of the TaN/Py interface. In the superconducting state of
sample E, we observe a large increase in σf with decreasing T. The observation
of a field-like σf in the superconducting state is in agreement with our previous
results on NbN/Py-heterostructures in Sec. 5.2. We note that the strong increase
in σf below T = 2.75 K provides further evidence for the presence of a second
superconducting transition for T ≤ 2.75 K, though this effect evidently does not
require direct SC/FM-contact [see Fig. 5.19(a)]. From this result, we infer that the
magnitude of σf depends on the superconducting Cooper pair density ns . The
detected enhancement in σf in the superconducting state for both NbN/Py- and
TaN/Py-heterostructures demonstrates that the underlying effect is universal. We
speculate on its precise origin in the discussion of Fig. 5.20. In Fig. 5.19(b), we
plot the contribution of Faraday currents to Im( L̃0 ) in the superconducting state
L̃F as function of reduced temperature. We observe a steep increase in sample E,
whereas Im( L̃0 ) of sample F remained close to zero throughout the investigated
temperature range. The magnitude of L̃F in sample E is a factor of ≈ 3 smaller than
what has been observed for our NbN/Py-heterostructures in Fig. 5.19(b) despite
the lower London penetration depth λL ≃ 20 nm of TaN [343] compared to NbN.
This result seems to indicate a reduced superconducting Cooper pair density
ns ∝ 1/λ2L in our TaN/Py hybrid compared to the NbN/Py-samples. This is
corroborated by the reduced FMR amplitude enhancement in the superconducting
state evident from Fig. 5.18.
To understand the impact of the enhanced spin-orbit interaction in TaN compared to NbN on the inverse spin-orbit torque conductivities, we plot in Fig. 5.20
the damping-like σd (a) and field-like σf (b) inverse spin-torque conductivities
of the SC/Py-bilayer samples A and E as function of reduced temperature. For
the damping-like σd in panel (a), we find comparable positive magnitudes in
the normal state indicating, that σd is dominated by the Py layer in the normal
state due to its higher conductivity. In the superconducting state, at T/Tc ≃ 0.5
the magnitude of σd in the TaN/Py-bilayer is larger compared to that of the
NbN/Py-bilayer in agreement with the experimentally found larger negative ΘSH
of TaN ( ΘSH ≈ −0.039 [356]) compared to that of NbN ( ΘSH ≈ −0.011 [279]).
For lower temperatures, the σd of sample A decays further and seemingly reaches
a constant value in agreement with theory predictions (see Sec. 5.2). Note, that
these low T/Tc -values are experimentally not accessible for the sample E due
to the reduced Tc of TaN. In Fig. 5.20(b), we observe for the field-like σf of our
samples in the normal state a slightly larger positive value for sample A compared
to sample E, which we attribute to the higher conductivity of NbN compared
to TaN and the corresponding larger σint in combination with the iREE. In the
superconducting state, the observed increase in σf is much stronger for sample
A as compared to sample E. Furthermore, for sample A, σf reaches a constant

98

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

(a )

4
σf ( 1 0 5 / Ωm )

E
0

σd ( 1 0 5 / Ωm )

(b )
A

2

-2
0
0 .5

1 .0
T /T c

1 .5

0 .5

1 .0

1 .5

T /T c

Fig. 5.20. – Inverse spin torque conductivities of the NbN/Py- and TaN/Py-bilayer
samples A and E as function in the superconducting state of reduced temperature.
(a) Damping-like spin torque conductivity σd plotted as a function of T/Tc . A positive
σd is detected in both samples in the normal state. In the SC state, the σd for both
samples reach negative values for a low reduced temperature. (b) Field-like spin torque
conductivity σf plotted as a function of T/Tc . A much stronger enhancement in σf below
Tc is observed in sample A compared to sample E.

value at T/Tc ≈ 0.6, while increasing continuously with reducing temperatures
for sample E. This observation can be related to the non-uniform superconducting
transition in sample E, which clearly demonstrates that σf strongly depends on
the superconducting Cooper pair density. In light of these results, we interpret
the strongly enhanced σf in the superconducting state of sample A to currents
induced by the dynamic field-like currents in superconductors as theoretically
proposed in Refs. [295, 362].
To summarize our experimental findings in this section, we have optimized
the reactive dc magnetron sputtering deposition for superconducting TaN thin
films on SiO2 and have achieved films with a superconducting Tc of up to 5 K and
a critical field of µ0 Hc2 ( T = 0) = (13.8 ± 0.1) T. Using our optimized deposition
recipe, we fabricated TaN/Py-bilayers and performed broadband ferromagnetic
resonance experiments in combination with our inductive analysis technique as a
function of temperature and compare our results to our findings with those in
Sec. 5.2. We find that in the superconducting state α decreases due to the freeze-out
of thermally excited quasiparticles and a finite QMiSHE manifests in σd . Overall
the results of bbFMR spectroscopy are in good agreement to those in our previous
study on NbN/Py-bilayers [68] and demonstrate the universality of the observed
behavior for the σST for SC/FM-hybrids. In comparison to the NbN/Py-hybrids,
our TaN/Py-heterostructures exhibit a larger σd due to the larger spin Hall angle
in TaN and a much lower magnitude in σf , which hints to the crucial impact of
the superconducting Cooper pair density to σf , which strongly indicates that the
observed enhancement in σf is related to superconducting field-like currents as
theoretically proposed in Refs. [295, 362].

5.3 Spin torques in TaN/Py-heterostructures

99

5.4 Summary and Outlook
In summary, the goal of the research discussed in this chapter was to study
the dynamic spin transport into superconductors in SC/FM-heterostructures.
Here, recent experiments [49, 256, 257, 285–288] have reported a diverse range
of different effects for the magnetization damping in the superconducting state
ranging from a monotonic reduction in the Gilbert damping α due to a freeze-out
of quasiparticles (QP) mediating the spin transport [256] over the manifestation
of a quasiparticle coherence peak in α for temperatures slightly below Tc [257]
to an enhanced FMR-linewidth ∆H mediated by spin-triplet Cooper pairs [49].
These competing results have motivated us to study these hybrid systems from
a different angle by studying the inductive coupling between sample and CPW
as a function of frequency. By incorporating this inductive analysis technique in
the established data analysis procedure based on the work of Berger et al. [84]
and accounting for the modified FMR-properties in the superconducting state,
we have developed a data analysis procedure to simultaneously study both the
magnetization dynamics parameters and inverse spin torques of our SC/FMhybrids as detailed in Sec. 5.1. Notably, in particular the damping-like inverse
spin torque conductivity σd allows to study the iSHE and hence constitutes a
measure for the spin pumping mechanism at the interface that can be related
and compared to the recorded Gilbert damping parameter α. We have studied
the magnetization dynamics and inverse spin torque conductivities of several
SC/FM-heterostructures using the superconductor NbN and including heavy
metal Platinum layers between either SC and FM or SC and substrate to investigate
the modified spin injection into Pt in the superconducting state as well as the
impact of its exchange field and the proposed generation of spin-triplet Cooper
pairs on the spin transport properties of superconductors [49].
The results in Sec. 5.2 revealed the manifestation of a small out-of-plane
oop
anisotropy field Hani induced by superconducting Meißner currents in agreement
to the observations in Refs. [287, 316]. In our case, the magnitude is decreased,
hinting at the necessity to use SC/FM/SC-trilayers to observe a large effect [355].
For the Gilbert damping α, we observe a decrease in the superconducting state,
indicating the blocking of spin currents in superconductors due to the manifesting
energy gap ∆ in the superconducting state in agreement with the findings by
Bell et al. [256]. Notably, our results can nonetheless reproduce the enhanced
FMR-linewidth ∆H in the superconducting state observed and attributed to spin
transport by spin-triplet Cooper pairs by Jeon et al. [49] as the inhomogeneous
linewidth increases in the superconducting state thus generating a net FMRlinewidth increase for low driving frequencies. This blocking of spin currents
is also apparent in the damping-like spin-torque conductivity σd as we observe
a strong reduction with reducing temperature of the large positive σd from the
iSHE in SC/FM-hybrid samples containing Pt. For low temperatures T  Tc ,

100

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

we instead observe the manifestation of a negative σd in agreement with the
quasiparticle-mediated iSHE in NbN [47]. For the field-like σf , we have observed
an unexpectedly large positive contribution in the superconducting state, which
seems to be independent of material interfaces in our hybrids and does not
require a direct SC/FM-interface ruling out the contribution of the inverse RashbaEdelstein effect [38]. While this effect remained unexplained in our initial study,
the follow-up work on TaN/Py-heterostructures discussed later in this section has
allowed us to shed some light on the physics at play for this effect. Our initial
study on NbN/Py-heterostructures containing Pt [68] has allowed to reconcile
the seemingly contradictory effects of the works of Bell et al. [256] and Jeon et
al. [49] with the observation of the blocking of superconducting spin currents in
both α and σd . Simultaneously, we demonstrate the contactless detection of the
quasiparticle inverse spin Hall effect in agreement with Ref. [47]. Motivated by
the proposal in Ref. [268], that the absence of FMR features associated with spintriplet Cooper pairs in our initial experiments [68] could be attributed to the short
coherence length of NbN (ξ 0 ≃ 5 nm [257]), we decided to further study the impact
of spin-orbit interaction in superconductors on their spin transport properties
and repeated our bbFMR experiments using the heavy spin-orbit interaction
superconductor TaN, where the spin-orbit field generated by TaN should directly
enable the generation of spin-triplets without the need to additionally include a
Pt layer in the sample stack.
To this end, we have optimized the reactive sputter deposition process for the
growth of TaN and studied the magnetization dynamics parameters and inverse
spin torque conductivities σST of TaN/Py-heterostructures in Sec. 5.3. Our optimized recipe yielded a superconducting Tc of up to 5 K on SiO2 and a critical field
of µ0 Hc2 ( T = 0) = (13.8 ± 0.1) T comparable to literature values [338, 341]. The
TaN/Py-bilayer grown using this optimized growth recipe exhibited a very similar
behavior in its magnetization dynamics compared to the NbN/Py-heterostructures
in Sec. 5.2. Notably, despite the expected large spin-orbit interaction in TaN, a
reduction in the Gilbert damping α in the superconducting state was also observed for the TaN/Py-heterostructures. Interestingly, for the damping-like spin
torque conductivity σd a larger negative contribution at a fixed T/Tc has been
observed as compared to NbN attributed to the QMiSHE due to the larger spin
Hall angle in TaN [356]. Furthermore, the observed field-like σf manifesting in the
superconducting state exhibited much lower values compared to the NbN/Pybilayers,indicating the crucial impact of the superconducting Cooper pair density
to σf . This observation points to charge currents with a field-like symmetry generated directly in the superconductor as proposed in Refs. [295, 362]. Future
experiments are required to identify the precise physical mechanism giving rise
to the enhanced σf in our heterostructures.
Our presented experiments have enabled to investigate the spin transport in
superconductors from a new perspective by adding the inverse spin torque con-

5.4 Summary and Outlook

101

ductivities as parameters for its study. Despite our best efforts, the enhancement
of spin transport by spin-triplet Cooper pairs has remained elusive in our experiments both on SC/FM-hybrids containing Pt as well as for the superconductor
with strong spin-orbit interaction TaN. Notably, the reduction in α in the superconducting state of SC/FM-hybrids observed in our experiments has recently
been confirmed by Refs. [363, 364]. The damping-like σd in the superconducting
state represents an alternative detection technique for the study of the QMiSHE
in superconductors to the spin-current injection experiments in Ref. [47], which
does not require sample patterning. The observed large σf in the superconducting
state raises interesting questions regarding the theoretical understanding of spin
current transport in SC/FM hybrids. Our experimental findings point to the
flux of frequency-dependent charge currents in the superconducting state apart
from the superconducting Meißner currents. Such intrinsic charge currents in
superconductors in the presence of spin-orbit interaction have been proposed in
Refs. [295, 362]. An attempt to demonstrate the control of the magnetization in
the Py layer via superconducting spin torques has been performed in Ref. [122],
where it was found, that the required currents to generate sizable effects in the FM
layer exceed the superconducting critical current Ic . Instead, our future research
aims to observe a modulation of the properties of magnetization dynamics by
charge-current induced spin torques in the superconducting state using the microfocused frequency-resolved magneto-optic Kerr effect (µFR-MOKE) technique
outlined in Refs. [30, 365] at cryogenic temperatures.

102

Chapter 5

Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

Magnon-Photon coupling in
superconducting microwave
resonators/ferromagnetic
microstructure hybrids

6

In the previous chapters, we have investigated, how magnetization dynamics in
magnetic thin films are modified by coupling it to fluctuators caused by disordered
magnetic impurities (See Ch. 4) and elementary excitations in superconductors
(See Ch. 5). In the following, we will study the coupling of the quantized excitations of the spin lattice (magnons) in ferromagnets couple to other excitations such
as the quantized elastic modes of the crystal lattice (phonons) or the quantized
modes of electromagnetic resonators (photons). We will see that the finite coupling leads to hybridized modes. We begin with the investigation of the coupling
between magnons in ferromagnetic thin films and photons in superconducting
microwave resonators. High quality superconducting microwave resonators are
central building blocks for today’s quantum science and technology. This particularly includes quantum information processing with superconducting circuit
elements [366–368] as well as the realization of single photon detectors [369–371].
Furthermore, they represent an important enabling technology for a variety of
quantum devices such as quantum limited microwave amplifiers [372–374] and
also play a key role in hybrid quantum systems like nano-electromechanical
systems [375], cavity magnonic systems [78, 376, 377] and hybrids based on the
spin-photon interaction [378–381]. One particular advantage of superconducting
resonators is the possibility to achieve high and ultra-high quality factors Q in
planar designs e.g. in the form of lumped-element or coplanar waveguide resonators [382–384]. This means that photons can be stored for a long time within
the small mode volume of such resonators leading to strong and even ultra-strong
light matter interaction.
While aluminum and niobium are the most commonly used materials in
superconducting quantum technology, superconductors with higher critical temperatures Tc and high upper critical field exist and are discussed as temperatureand magnetic field-robust alternatives for hybrid devices. Note that the higher
Tc translates into a larger superconducting gap. Altogether, this offers an enhanced robustness against magnetic fields and better performance at ’elevated’
temperatures due to the correspondingly lower density of thermally induced
quasiparticles. This furthermore allows one to push hybrid quantum systems to
elevated temperatures and frequencies [385, 386]. Here, the compound niobium

103

titanium nitride (NbTiN) is a prime candidate, known as a hard type II superconductor with a transition temperature of up to Tc = 17 K [313, 387, 388] a large
upper critical field. The expected good resonator performance over both large
magnetic field- and temperature ranges motivate us to optimize the fabrication of
NbTiN resonators for electron spin resonance (ESR) and ferromagnetic resonance
(FMR) experiments in the strong coupling regime [78, 382]. The results of this
optimization process for superconducting NbTiN microwave resonators, presented
in section 6.1, are published in
M. Müller, T. Luschmann, A. Faltermeier, S. Weichselbaumer, L. Koch, G.B.P.
Huber, H.W. Schumacher, N. Ubbelohde, D. Reifert, T. Scheller, F. Deppe, A. Marx,
S. Filipp, M. Althammer, R. Gross, H. Huebl, Magnetic field robust high quality factor
NbTiN superconducting microwave resonators, Materials for Quantum Technology 2,
015002 (2022) [70].
Having optimized the fabrication of superconducting NbTiN planar microwave
resonators, in Sec. 6.2, we use them as a platform for the implementation of onchip magnon-photon hybrid devices with a magnetic strip fabricated from the
metallic ferromagnet Co25Fe75(CoFe) deposited on top of the inductive element
of our meander-shaped superconducting planar microwave NbTiN resonators.
As a ferromagnetic material, CoFe is selected, due to its resilient growth properties via sputtering deposition, high spin density [65] and ultralow Gilbert
damping [135, 389, 390], whereas our NbTiN resonators, besides their demonstrated excellent robustness to external magnetic fields and elevated temperatures,
are quasi-onedimensional cavities and therefore exhibit smaller mode volumes
compared to macroscopic microwave cavities. This allows for the coupling of
magnons with long-lived and concentrated photons in the resonator [79]. In our
experiments, we investigate two types of hybrid devices, where the CoFe is (i)
coupled either directly to the NbTiN layer and (ii) grown on top of an insulating AlN layer, spatially separating the CoFe from the NbTiN, to investigate the
impact of a direct ferromagnetic exchange bias on the magnon-photon coupling.
Magnon-photon hybrid devices of the latter type exhibit strong coupling with an
effective magnon-photon coupling rate of geff /(2π) = (120 ± 4) MHz resulting
in an estimated coupling rate per magnetic moment µB of g0 /(2π) ≈ 223 Hz ,
which together with the loss rates of microwave resonator κr and magnetic thin
2 / (κ κ ) ≈ 136 at a temperature of
film κs translates to a cooperativity of C = geff
r s
T = 3 K. These results are comparable to the best state of the art magnon-photon
devices from Refs. [79, 80] and unite the high g0 of Ref. [80] with the usage of
a hard-type-II-superconductor as done in Ref. [79] and hence demonstrate the
suitability of NbTiN as a material platform to implement magnon-photon hybrid
devices.
For the resonators, which are directly exchange-coupled, we observe a
magnon-photon coupling in the Purcell-enhanced regime [149] due an increased
magnetic relaxation rate κs for the CoFe layer, which has been directly grown on

104

Chapter 6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

top of the NbTiN resonator. The results of our magnon-photon hybrid devices
will be published in a manuscript, that is still in preparation at the time of the
writing of this thesis.
S. Yoshii, M. Müller, P. Oehrl, J. Franz, M. Althammer, R. Gross, M. Masashi, H.
Huebl, Manuscript title pending (202X).

6.1 Characterization of superconducting NbTiN
planar microwave resonators
In this section, we present the investigation of the quality factors for thin-film
NbTiN lumped element microwave resonators from a materials perspective and
compare the achieved quality factors for various substrate configurations. Furthermore, we characterize the performance of our resonators under experimentally
relevant conditions for ESR and FMR experiments at applied external in-plane
magnetic fields and elevated temperatures. Finally, we test their suitability for
quantum science applications by quantifying their Qint under optimal conditions,
when cooled down to mK temperatures and using appropriate radiative and
magnetic flux shielding in the Bluefors LD-400 dry dilution refrigerator (see
Sec. 3.3).

6.1.1 Loss mechanisms of superconducting microwave
resonators
The various loss mechanisms of superconducting microwave resonators constitute a large area of research subject to intensive study in the field of quantum
physics. Here, we will only give a very brief overview on the most important loss
mechanisms necessary for the understanding of the presented results, which is
based on contemporary review articles and PhD theses [192,391–393]. The internal
quality factor Qint of our superconducting NbTiN resonators is limited by the
combined contribution of all loss mechanisms present in the system. Loss channels for superconducting resonators include losses from trapped superconducting
vortices [394, 395], radiative losses [396], thermally excited quasiparticles [192, 193]
and the coupling to parasitic modes of the used sample box or transmission
line [397]. For the experiments in the 17T cryostat (see Sec. 3.3), pronounced losses
are expected in particular from vortices induced by flux coupled into the resonator
via the superconducting coils of the magnet as well as from thermally enhanced
quasiparticles at the experimentally accessible temperatures T ≤ 2.2 K. In contrast,
for the mK-experiments, the used Bluefors LD-400 dry dilution refrigerator (see
Sec. 3.3) allows for experiments in the mK-range with shielding from external
radiation and magnetic fields allowing to avoid these loss mechanisms. Hence,
much higher quality factors are expected in our mK-experiments. Furthermore,
the used resonator sample boxes have been designed to exhibit different resonant

6.1

Characterization of superconducting NbTiN planar microwave resonators

105

box mode frequencies from the NbTiN superconducting resonators at f ≃ 5 GHz.
Apart from the resonator loss channels listed so far, two level systems (TLS) with
an energy splitting corresponding to f r can interact coherently with the electric
field of the resonator and enable an energy transfer from the resonator to the
phonon bath. Thereby TLS constitute an additional loss channel in superconducting circuits [398]. Hence, the magnitude of the TLS-induced losses strongly
depend on the microwave power P driven through the feedline [195, 391, 399, 400].
In our experiments, these TLS are present primarily in the amorphous oxide-layers
at the resonator interfaces: (i) the interface between the superconducting metal
layer and the air (MA), (ii) the interface between the substrate and metal (MS) and
in the areas, where the metal has been removed via etching (iii) between substrate
and air (Sa). These three interfaces are illustrated in Fig. 6.1(a).
(a)

(b)
MA

Collective
Motion

Tunneling

Metal
MS

SA

Substrate

Dangling
Bonds

Hydrogen
Rotors

Fig. 6.1. – (a) Amorphous host interfaces of the TLS: Green lines indicate the metal-air
interface (MA), violet lines represent the metal-substrate interface (MS) and green lines
are the substrate-air interface (SA). (b) Possible physical mechanisms for TLS at the
amorphous interfaces. Adapted from Ref. [391].

Despite extensive research [192, 196, 392, 401, 402], the precise microscopic
mechanism that gives rise to TLS in amorphous solids remains elusive. Proposed
mechanisms discussed in literature are illustrated in Fig. 6.1(b). The most heavily
discussed mechanism is the existence of a bi-stable configuration of the atoms in
the amorphous solid, where atoms can tunnel between the two configurations at
a certain oscillation frequency [391]. Other proposed mechanisms for TLS include
hydrogen interstitials [403], dangling bonds [404] and the interaction of tunneling
electrons with collective phonon modes [405]. We note, that in contrast to the other
listed intrinsic resonator loss mechanisms, the contribution of TLS is independent
on the used setup and can be strongly reduced by removing the amorphous SiO2
from the MS and SA interfaces as well as potential metallic oxides such as Nb2O5and TiO2 from the SA and MA interfaces. In our experiments, we remove the
surface oxides by performing a buffered oxide etch (BOE) using a ∼7:1 mixture of
hydrofluoric acid (HF, 6.5 wt%) and ammonium fluoride (34.8 wt%). HF ionizes
in water via the reactions [404, 406]
HF

106

Chapter 6

H+ + F–, HF + F–

HF2–,

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

(6.1)

and removes the SiO2 layer following
SiO2 + 3HF2– + H+ ← SiF6– + 2H2O.

(6.2)

The HF treatment thereby results in a hydrogen passivized surface, which temporarily protects the silicon surface from reoxidization [404, 407]. To avoid an
overabundance of H+, the electrolytic ammonium fluoride buffer is used as a
source of F–-ions to stabilize the ratio of F–-ions and H+ ions , which greatly
increases the etch rate of SiO2 (≃ 2 nm/s for a BOE 5:1 mixture ratio [392, 406]).
In our process, the silicon substrate is immersed in the BOE solution for 30 s to
ensure the complete removal of the native oxide layer and is subsequently directly
installed in the Loadlock of the Ultradisk sputtering system within a time frame
of approximately two minutes to avoid reoxidization. Consequently, our resonator
optimization study aims in particular to mitigate TLS losses at these interfaces
by using different substrates and performing BOE sample treatments prior to
deposition.

6.1.2 Optimization series of our superconducting resonators
In detail, our superconducting planar microwave resonators are patterned
into NbTiN thin films grown by sputter deposition on both pristine (001) oriented
high-resistivity Si substrates (ρ > 104 Ωcm) and on thermally oxidized SiO2
(1 µm) on Si substrates (ρ > 4 · 103 Ωcm). The Nb70 Ti30 N thin films with a layer
thickness of d = 150 nm were grown on both thermally oxidized and bare Si (100)
substrates in the Ultradisk using reactive dc magnetron sputtering in a mixed
N2 /Ar-atmosphere with a gas flow ratio of 3.8/36.2, a deposition temperature of
Tdepo = 500 ◦ C, a pressure of pdepo = 5 µbar, and a deposition power of Ps = 95 W
using a 4” Nb70 Ti30 target. These sputtering parameters are the result of a growth
optimization series [186] to maximize the superconducting transition temperature
of NbTiN reaching a maximum of Tc = 16.3 K. For this study, the Ultradisk
sputtering machine is used, as Ref. [186] had previously observed higher quality
factors in a comparative study using the Ultradisk sputtering chamber compared
to the Superbowls cluster potentially due to magnetic contaminants in the latter.
In this study, NbTiN thin films made from three differently processed substrates
and different materials have been fabricated at WMI and characterized in terms
of their quality factors: (i) NbTiN grown on a SiO2 (1 µm) on Si substrate labeled
SiO2, (ii) NbTiN grown on a pristine Si substrate (ρ > 4 · 103 Ωcm) with a native
oxide layer, which we will refer to as Si and (iii) NbTiN grown on a pristine
Si substrate (ρ > 4 · 103 Ωcm, where the surface oxide layer is removed with a
buffered oxide etch labeled BOE [193, 404, 408].
We compare the performance of the resonators of these three samples to
(iv) one resonator chip patterned with the identical geometry from NbTiN thin
films, which have been deposited on 300 nm thick thermally oxidized SiO2 on

6.1

Characterization of superconducting NbTiN planar microwave resonators

107

Si substrate (ρ = 1 − 10 Ωcm) at the Physikalisch-Technischen Bundesanstalt (PTB),
which we label as PTB. There, the NbTiN was grown with a layer thickness
of 150 nm at a N2 /Ar gas flow ratio of 2.6/20 without any substrate heating
and thermalization, a pressure of pdepo = 5 µbar and at a deposition power of
Ps = 320 W using a 6” Nb70 Ti30 target.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) surface roughness scans displayed in Fig. 6.2
indicate low root mean square (RMS) surface roughness values of less than 1 nm for
(a) the sample SiO2 (RMS roughness = 0.6 nm), (b) the Si-sample, where NbTiN
is grown on a Si substrate with native oxide layer (RMS roughness = 0.7 nm) and
(c) the PTB sample (RMS roughness = 0.8 nm). These AFM scans are representative for the whole sample area, as a uniform roughness of the NbTiN thin films
throughout the substrate area of 6 × 10 mm2 has been confirmed by performing
several AFM scans at varying positions on the chip. Interestingly, the NbTiN
film grown on a Si substrate at the WMI, where the native oxide was stripped off
prior to the deposition using a BOE treatment, BOE in panel (d), exhibits a higher
roughness (RMS roughness = 1.5 nm) and large visible grains. We attribute this
to the highly textured growth of NbTiN induced by the removal of the native
amorphous oxide layer, as exclusively this NbTiN thin film exhibited diffraction
peaks in x-ray scans along the (002) plane of the cubic phase oriented parallel to
the substrate surface [409, 410]. A detailed analysis of the x-ray diffraction of this
sample has been added to the Appendix F. We note, that a low surface roughness
(a)

SiO2
500 nm

(nm)

Si

(b)

6.0

6.0

4.0

(c)

PTB

(nm)

4.0

2.0

2.0

0.0

0.0

(nm)
8.0
6.0

BOE
0.6

(d)

500 nm
0.4

20 µm

(nm)
20.0
15.0

4.0

0.2

10.0

2.0

0.0

5.0

0.0

0.0

Fig. 6.2. – Atomic force microscopy surface scans of a 1 µm2 -area for the 150 nm thick
NbTiN film deposited on (a) a SiO2 -substrate (SiO2) (b) Si-substrate (Si), (c) a SiO2 substrate from the PTB (PTB), (d) a BOE treated Si-substrate (BOE). The extracted RMS
surface roughnesses are (a) 0.6 nm, (b) 0.7 nm, (c) 0.8 nm and (d) 1.5 nm, respectively.

is desirable to reduce losses in the planar microwave resonators at the metal-air
(MA) interface [411].

108

Chapter 6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

Resonator
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5∗

fr (GHz)
4.672
4.806
4.924
5.026
5.133

Q (×103 )
84.7±1.4
61.0±0.1
84.3±0.6
69.4±2.3
17.9±0.1

Qint (×103 )
215.2±9.0
152.2±5.3
207.8±3.8
161.7±12.0
50.6±0.1

Qext (×103 )
139.7±0.1
101.9±0.1
141.9±0.1
121.5±0.1
27.9±0.1

Tab. 6.1. – Extracted fitting parameters for resonance frequency f r , the quality factors Q,
Qint and Qext for the five on-chip NbTiN resonators of the BOE-sample. Measurements
are performed at T = 2.2 K, µ0 Hext = 0 mT and at a microwave power corresponding to
the high power regime. Resonator R5 is marked with a ∗ , as it has been omitted from the
statistical analysis due to its uncharacteristically bad performance.

Using the micropatterning fabrication procedure using electron beam lithography
and reactive ion etching in a mixed SF6 /Ar-atmosphere as outlined in detail in
Sec. 3.2, all of the NbTiN films are patterned into planar lumped element resonators. The used chip layout includes a microwave transmission or feedline
coupled in a hanger-type configuration to five lumped element microwave resonators, which slightly differ in their capacitance C and hence their resonance
frequency f r . This configuration allows for a multiplexed readout of the on-chip
resonators (see also Fig. 3.3 for the geometry of the resonator layout). For our
initial characterization measurements, the finalized chip is mounted in a gold
plated oxygen free high thermal conductivity copper sample box and inserted
into the 17T cryostat using the measurement configuration depicted in Fig. 3.6(a).
In our initial resonator performance characterization experiments, we connect
the two ends of the central feed line to the two ports of a VNA and record the
complex transmission parameter S21 ( f ) at the lowest experimentally accessible
temperature T = 2.2 K and µ0 Hext = 0 mT close to the resonance frequency f r
for each of the five resonators using microwave powers that correspond to the
high-photon limit of the resonators (hnph i ≃ 107 ).
The quality factors Q, Qext and Qint as well as resonance frequency f r for
each resonator is then extracted individually by fitting the recorded complex
transmission data to S21 ( f ) using the ’circle fit method’ via Eq. (3.18). Exemplary
fitted Q, Qext and Qint and f r of the BOE-sample are listed in Tab. 6.1. The
fitted parameters for all resonators of this study are listed in the Appendix F2 in
Tabs. F1-F4.
Being primarily interested in the typically achievable performance of our
resonators, we choose to omit resonators with uncharacteristically low Qint from
our analysis. Hence, resonator R5 in Tab. 6.1, highlighted with an asterisk, is
omitted from our statistical analysis. To enable the reliable comparison for the
average resonator performance on different substrates, we calculate the mean Qfactors for each of the four samples, while accounting for the deviations between
the resonators by setting the value for the net error of the Q-values as the sum

6.1

Characterization of superconducting NbTiN planar microwave resonators

109

√
of the fitting uncertainty and a statistical error σ/ N, where σ is the standard
deviation of the extracted Q-values and N is the number of resonators. The
extracted average quality factors for all investigated NbTiN films grown on
different substrates are listed in Tab. 6.2. Additionally, we add the resonance
frequency of the third resonator with the middle resonance frequency f rR3 to
discuss the varying dielectric properties for the different resonators.
Substrate
SiO2
PTB
Si
BOE

Q (×103 )
9.3±1.8
11.7±1.6
28.5±7.9
74.6±7.0

Qint (×103 )
13.2±3.6
21.3±4.5
208.3±70.4
182.5±22.7

Qext (×103 )
38.7±10.7
45.2±15.0
37.8±11.6
126.3±9.8

fr R3 (GHz)
5.525
4.697
4.927
4.924

Tab. 6.2. – Mean quality factors Q, Qint and Qext and resonance frequency of resonator 3
f rR3 of the NbTiN resonators, deposited on the different substrates. Measurements are
performed at T = 2.2 K, µ0 Hext = 0 mT and at a microwave power corresponding to the
high power regime.

For the NbTiN films grown on SiO2 at the WMI denoted as SiO2, we obtain
an average internal quality factor of Qint = (13.2 ± 3.6) · 103 , which is about 1.5
times lower than that of the PTB film [Qint = (21.3 ± 4.5) · 103 ], despite the a larger
surface roughness of this film [see Fig. 6.2(a) and (b)]. As the NbTiN resonators
from the PTB are patterned on substrates with a lower SiO2 layer thickness
(dPTB
SiO2 = 150 nm) compared to the NbTiN resonators grown on SiO2 at the WMI
WMI
(dSiO2 = 1 µm), this result suggests that the thickness of the thermally grown oxide
layer has a strong impact on Qint .We interpret this as the TLS losses scaling with
the thickness of the oxide layer. The increased f rR3 of the SiO2-sample with respect
to the other samples can be understood from the reduced dielectric constant
e of the SiO2-layer compared to elementary Si [86], whereas the comparatively
reduced f rR3 of the PTB-sample is attributed to the reduced layer thickness of the
used Si substrate. Note, that the third resonators has been designed to exhibit
an f r ≈ 5 GHz on Si substrates by using finite element simulations [412]. Hence,
we can confirm a decent frequency targeting for the resonators on samples Si
and BOE, where NbTiN is grown on bare Si substrates. Furthermore, the precise
deposition conditions play an important role on the obtained quality factors. In
particular, the selected deposition power Pdepo governs the deposition rate rdepo ,
which has been found to have a crucial impact on the disorder in superconductors
with higher deposition rates being desirable [413]. The comparatively higher
deposition power used for the films grown at PTB can hence also give rise to
NbTiN thin films with reduced disorder-induced TLS, though no clear correlation
between Pdepo and Qint has been observed for our films in Ref. [186]. For the
resonators of the Si-sample, we find one order of magnitude higher average
internal quality factors Qint = (208.3 ± 70.4) · 103 compared to samples SiO2 and

110

Chapter 6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

PTB. We attribute this to increased TLS losses from the MS interface induced
by the diffusion of oxygen from the SiO2 -layer into the NbTiN layer in these
samples. The resonators for the NbTiN thin films grown on BOE-treated Si
achieved internal quality factors Qint = (182.5 ± 22.7) · 103 , comparable to those of
the untreated Si-substrate. This finding indicates, that the TLS at the MS-interface
from the remaining native SiO2-layer are not the limiting factor for the resonator
performance. The slightly lower average Qint for the BOE-sample compared to
the Si-sample are attributed to its larger surface roughness (see Fig. 6.2) and the
resulting enhanced losses from oxidized Nb2O5 and TiO2-phases [414] at the
roughened MA-interface. Notably, the enhanced crystalline texturing of the BOEsample does not result in higher internal quality factors, indicating that TLS losses
in the bulk of the superconductor, induced for example from lattice interstitials or
dangling bonds in the reactively sputtered NbTiN compound, do not significantly
contribute to Qint . In summary, we find in our sample series, that losses from TLS
at the MS-interface constitute the dominant loss mechanism in our resonators,
which can be greatly mitigated by using bare Si substrates. We identify TLS from
the Nb2O5- and TiO2-phases at the MA-interface as a secondary source of losses,
whereas the crystalline quality of the bulk does not impact the performance of our
resonators in contrast to the results of Ref. [404]. By fitting our raw data for S21 ( f )
to equation (3.18), we are also able to extract the external quality factors Qext of
our resonators. Here, we find in Tab. 6.2, that the resonators of the samples SiO2,
PTB and Si share an external quality factor of Qext ≈ 4 · 104 within the margin
of error. This is expected as we have used the identical layout for all chips (see
Fig. 3.3) with an equal spacing of wgs = 40 µm between feed line and resonators,
except for those of the BOE samples. Here, we have used wTL = 70 µm to avoid
large uncertainties in Qint for overcoupled resonators resulting in Qext ≈ 1.3 · 105
for this case. In comparison to existing results for planar microwave resonators
made from elementary Nb at the WMI [382, 415], our NbTiN resonators grown on
Si exhibit an one order of magnitude higher the Qint at liquid helium temperatures
and are now used as the base material platform for ongoing research towards the
implementation of quantum memory based on spin donors in Si [416] and EPR
spectroscopy on 2d materials.

6.1.3 Performance of NbTiN resonators at elevated
temperatures and at applied magnetic fields
Having developed an optimal recipe for the fabrication of superconducting
planar microwave NbTiN resonators with a high Qint ≃ 2 · 105 at T = 2.2 K, we
now study the robustness of our resonators to elevated temperatures, which is of
particular interest in ESR experiments to identify the various possible spin-lattice
and spin-spin interaction mechanisms, which govern the spin-lattice- and spinspin relaxation rates T1 and T2 [191, 417]. To exemplify the typical performance of

6.1

Characterization of superconducting NbTiN planar microwave resonators

111

our NbTiN resonators, we focus on R1 from Tab. 6.1 of the BOE-sample. Figure 6.3
shows the relative change in its resonance frequency and internal Q-factor in the
temperature range (2.2 ≤ T ≤ 13) K. The superconducting transition temperature
Tc = 16.3 K for this NbTiN thin film was determined by recording the transmission parameter |S21 ( T )| as function of temperature using the same method as
in Ch. 5, which is described in the appendix C. We also attempted to characterized the performance of this resonator in the range (13 K ≤ Tc ), but found that
when approaching Tc the steep dependence of f r with temperature limited the
reliable determination of Qint due to finite temperature fluctuations. As shown
(a )

(b )

T c
1 0 0

5 0

Q

in t/ Q

0

in t ( %

1 - ∆f r / f r 0 ( % )

)

1 0 0

9 5
0
5

1 0
T (K )

1 5

5

1 0

1 5

T (K )

Fig. 6.3. – Internal quality factor of a NbTiN resonator (R1 of the BOE-sample from
Tab. 6.1) as function of temperature T. (a) Normalized change in resonance frequency
1 − ∆ f r ( T )/ f r0 as a function of temperature T. The black dashed vertical line indicates
Tc = 16.3 K and the red curve represents a fit following the imaginary part of Eq. (6.3). (b)
Internal quality factor Qint normalized by its value at T = 2.2 K. The red curve represents
a fit to the real part of Eq. (6.3) to the data with a finite residual quality factor. The blue
dashed lines in panel (b) indicate where Qint drops below 105 .

in Fig. 6.3(a), the resonance frequency f r remains roughly constant in the range
T ≤ 7 K, and then rapidly drops with increasing T, reaching a maximum relative
change of 5.5% at T = 13 K. For the Qint of this resonator, plotted in Fig. 6.3(b),
we observe a much stronger reduction with increasing T, approaching only about
1.5% of its low temperature value at T = 13 K. We model the temperature dependence of the resonance frequency f r ( T ) and the internal quality factor Qint ( T )
of the resonators with that of the surface reactance Xs ( T ) and surface resistance
Rs ( T ) of the superconducting NbTiN using the relation [192, 418]
1
∆ fr (T )
β
+ 2i
=
( RS ( T ) + iδXS ( T )).
0
0
Qint ( T )
fr
µ 0 ωr λ L ( 0 )

(6.3)

Here, β denotes the contribution of the kinetic inductance to the total inductance,
µ0 is the vacuum permeability and δXS ( T ) represents the change in surface reac-

112

Chapter 6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

tance with temperature [δXS ( T ) = XS ( T ) − XS (0)]. The temperature dependence
of Rs ( T ) and δXS ( T ) is given by [258, 419]
nn ( T )
1 2 3
µ0 λL ( T )ω 2 σ0
2
n
δXS ( T ) = µ0 ω [λL ( T ) − λL (0)],
RS ( T ) =

(6.4)

where σ0 is the normal state conductivity, nn ( T ) is the density of unpaired charge
carriers and n the total charge carrier density. As previously used in Ch. 5, we
determine nn ( T/Tc )/n = 1 − 2ns ( T/Tc )/n, where ns is the cooper pair density,
using BCS theory [319, 320]. Equation (6.3) can be divided into a real and an
imaginary part, which respectively correspond to the temperature evolution of
the resonance frequency f r and the internal quality factor Qint . The resulting
fit using Eq. (6.3) is presented as a red line in Fig. 6.3(a). By using the relation
p
λL ( T ) = λL (0)/ 1 − ( T/Tc )4 [361], with λL (0) = 200 nm for NbTiN [420] and
Tc = 16.3 K, we obtain β = 0.124 ± 0.001. This value of β falls into the expected
range for planar 2D-resonators (10−2 ≤ β ≤ 1) [421–423]. In the following step,
we fit the internal quality factor Qint ( T ) in Fig. 6.3(b) using the real part of Eq. (6.3)
and the previously used parameters for Tc and λL and the extracted value β.
The fitting curve is shown as a red line in Fig. 6.3(b). We obtain a normal state
conductivity of σ0 = (11 ± 4) · 106 Ω−1 m−1 , which is in good agreement with the
results of Van-der-Pauw transport experiments [226] on our unpatterned films,
where we detected varying σ0 in the low 106 Ω−1 m−1 -range. The dashed blue line
in Fig. 6.3(b) represents the temperature, where the Qint of R1 decays below 105 .
We find a Qint > 105 for temperatures T ≤ 4.8 K, which greatly outperforms the
”high-quality” temperature range of comparable resonators made from elementary
Nb [424].
As a next step, we investigate the performance of our resonators in an external
in-plane magnetic field to test their suitability for ESR- and FMR-applications.
In Fig. 6.4(a) and (b), we plot the normalized shift in resonance frequency 1 −
∆ f r ( T )/ f r0 and internal quality factor Qint of resonator R1 of the BOE-sample at
T = 2.2 K as function of applied external in-plane magnetic field µ0 Hext in the
range (0 mT ≤ µ0 Hext ≤ 440 mT). For higher µ0 Hext > 440 mT, the fitting of the
S21 ( f ) spectra of this resonator becomes unreliable.
For f r , we observe a weak reduction with increasing µ0 Hext due to the depletion of the superconducting condensate due to a reduction of the free enthalpy of
the superconductor due to the magnetic field repulsion, which can be fitted with
a quadratic relation [∆ f r (µ0 Hext ) ∝ (µ0 Hext )2 , red line in Fig. 6.4] in agreement
with Refs. [425, 426]. For the internal quality factor Qint in Fig. 6.4(b), we observe
a nearly constant Qint until µ0 Hext ≈ 130 mT and a strong decrease in Qint for
higher µ0 Hext . For the magnetic field performance of this resonator, a Qint > 105
is achieved for µ0 Hext ≤ 180 mT as indicated by the blue dashed lines in Fig. 6.4(b).
For comparison to elementary Nb, in Ref. [424] a reduction of Qint by a factor

6.1

Characterization of superconducting NbTiN planar microwave resonators

113

(a )

(b )
1 0 0

5 0

Q

in t/ Q

0

in t ( %

1 - ∆f r / f r 0 ( % )

)

1 0 0 .0

9 9 .5
0
0 .1

0 .3
µ 0H

e x t ( T

0 .1

)

0 .3
µ 0H

e x t ( T

)

Fig. 6.4. – Internal quality factor of a NbTiN resonator (R1 of the BOE-sample from
Tab. 6.1) in an external in-plane magnetic field µ0 Hext . (a) Normalized change in resonance frequency 1 − ∆ f r (µ0 Hext )/ f r0 as a function of µ0 Hext . The red curve represents a
quadratic fit. (b) Internal quality factor Qint normalized by its value at µ0 Hext = 0 mT.
The blue dashed lines in panel (b) indicate where Qint drops below 105 .

of ≈20 between zero-field and µ0 Hip = 180 mT was observed for Nb resonators,
whereas within the same field range, the internal quality factor of our NbTiN
resonators in Fig. 6.4(b) only reduce by a factor of ≈2. These results underpin the
better suitability of NbTiN compared to elementary Nb as a materials platform
for ESR and FMR experiments as it offers a good resonator performance over both
a larger magnetic field- and temperature range.

6.1.4 Performance of NbTiN resonators at mK temperatures
for quantum science applications
To characterize the performance of our resonators for quantum applications, we install the BOE-sample in a Bluefors LD-400 dry dilution refrigerator
[see Fig. 3.6(b)] using the same sample package as used for the 17 T setup and
characterize its resonator R1 at the cryostate’s base temperature of < 7 mK by
recording the complex transmission parameter S21 ( f ) as function of frequency
around f rR1 = 4.672 GHz. We then repeat this experiment for varying microwave
spectroscopy powers P to investigate the impact of the TLS on Qint . Here, P can
be translated into an average photon occupancy hnph i by using


hnph i = P

1
2κext
·
h · fr
κ


.

(6.5)

The measured Qint as function of hnph i is plotted in Fig. 6.5.
We observe a continuous increase in Qint with increasing resonator photon
population from ≈ 2 · 105 in the single photon limit at hnph i ≃ 1 to ≈ 5.2 · 105 in
the high power range at hnph i ≃ 107 . However, we do not observe a saturation
in Qint at high average photon numbers, suggesting that TLS-induced losses still
constitute a substantial loss channel even at these high hnph i in agreement to

114

Chapter 6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

0 .5

0 .3

Q

in t ( 1

0 6)

0 .4

0 .2
1 0 -1

1 0 0

1 0 1

1 0 2

1 0 3

1 0 4

1 0 5

1 0 6

1 0 7

〈n p h 〉

Fig. 6.5. – Intrinsic quality factor of a NbTiN resonator grown on BOE-treated Si (R1 from
Tab. 6.1) and measured in the Bluefors LD-400 dry dilution refrigerator [see Fig. 3.6(b)]
at T < 7 mK as function of photon number hnph i. The resonator Q-factors and f r are
extracted by fitting the S21 ( f )-spectra to Eq. (3.18) and are then used to convert the
calibrated input power P to hnph i using Eq. (6.5). The continuous red line represents a fit
to Eq. (6.6).

previous reports on the power-dependence of Qint in NbTiN in Refs. [402, 427].
The net Qint at millikelvin temperatures is about a factor of two higher compared
to the peak performance at T = 2.2 K in the 17T-setup in Tab. 6.1. We attribute
this disparity to the mitigation of thermal-, magnetic field- and radiation-induced
losses [192, 193]. The power dependence of Qint (hnph i) is fitted using [428, 429]
1
0
= F tan δTLS
Qint (hnph i)

hnph i
1+ c
hnph i

!−α

+

1
,
Q∗

(6.6)

0
where F tan δTLS
= 1/QTLS represents the total TLS loss at hnph i = 0 and T = 0 K,
c
hnph i denote the critical mean photon number above which the TLS defects are
saturated and α is an exponent indicating the deviation from the standard TLS
model (in the standard model α = 0.5). Finally, the offset 1/Q∗ accounts for all
other (non-TLS associated) loss channels.
From the fit using Eq. (6.6) to the experimentally extracted to Qint , shown as
0
a red line in Fig. 6.5, we extract the total TLS loss F tan δTLS
= (3.6 ± 0.1) · 10−6 ,
c i = (6.1 ± 0.7) · 103 , α = 0.14 ± 0.03 and Q∗ = (7.2 ± 0.2) · 105 . The fitted
hnph
magnitude of α deviates from α = 0.5 expected within the conventional TLS
model, but is in agreement with values found for Al [428]. The total TLS losses
consist of contributions originating from the dielectric losses at the MA, MS
and SA-interface as well as the impact of the loss tangent of the substrate (S).
Assuming that these are known factors and accounting for the geometry of the
0
resonator,we compute F tan δTLS
using Ansys HFSS (Ansys Electronics Desktop 2020
R2) finite element simulation software (for details see Appendix Sec. F3). We
use the same loss tangents tan(δi ), layer thicknesses di and dielectric constants
0
ei /e0 of the four dielectric regions as for TiN in Ref. [401], we obtain F tanδTLS
≈
−
6
0.5 · 10 with dominant losses from the substrate and SA-interface. This value

6.1

Characterization of superconducting NbTiN planar microwave resonators

115

is approximately one order of magnitude smaller than the experimentally fitted
0
F tan δTLS
= (3.6 ± 0.1) · 10−6 . This disparity suggests that either the NbTiN/Si
interface is not well described within our model or that other contributions play a
more dominant role. A detailed study disentangling and identifying the source of
this discrepancy is necessary in the future. The large value for the critical photon
c i extracted from the fit in Fig. 6.5 results from the continuous rise in
number hnph
Qint with hnph i as previously observed for NbTiN in Refs. [402, 427], but also for
other materials such as elementary Nb [430, 431], NbN [425, 432] and TiN [401]
and is the object of active research. One potential explanation is that NbTiN is
considered an extreme ’dirty superconductor’ with a large defect density, which
may constitute an additional source of TLS in our NbTiN thin films.
Notably, the Qint observed in our resonators is comparable to NbTiN resonators fabricated with similar processes [i.e. without deep reactive ion etching
(DRIE) or hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) surface passivation] in Ref. [427]. This
demonstrates the state-of-the-art performance of our sputter-deposited NbTiN
thin films and furthermore also suggests that defects within the material might
represent a limiting factor for our resonators. To investigate the metallic bulk loss
channel, future investigations of the impact on stoichiometry of NbTiN films as
well as crystalline growth modes are required [404]. In literature, higher quality
factors (Qint ≃ 106 ) for NbTiN have been achieved for coplanar waveguide NbTiN
resonators in Ref. [402]. Here, Bruno et al. have additionally performed deep
reactive ion etching (DRIE) and used hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) surface passivation to further reduced losses from TLS at the MS substrate interface and boost
the performance of their resonators. Hence, future studies on NbTiN deposited
on surface-passivated substrates and resonator patterning using DRIE to reduce
oxygen-related TLS at the metal/substrate-interface are desirable [402, 428].

6.2 Magnon-Photon coupling in thin-film devices
To characterize magnon-photon coupling in our heterostructures, we fabricate
NbTiN resonators with the same layout (see Fig. 3.3) and our optimized deposition
recipe including the buffered oxide etch and deposit a rectangular ferromagnetic
bar made from the ultralow damping alloy Co25Fe75 (CoFe) [135, 389, 390] with a
width of wFM = 11 µm, a length of lFM = 400 µm and a thickness of dFM = 30 nm
on top of the inductive element of the resonators (see Fig. 6.6) by performing an ex
situ deposition in the Superbowl sputtering machine. The rectangular structure is
processed via the lift-off technique using the resist procedure outlined in Sec. 3.2.
In detail, we pattern our resonators using different deposition recipes:
(i) We deposit a trilayer of CoFe(30 nm)/Cu(3 nm)/Ta( 3nm) directly on the
NbTiN layer of the resonator and thereby generate a direct SC/FM-interface,
which is expected to deteriorate the magnetic properties of the CoFe layer as
oxides are present at the NbTiN/CoFe-interface due to the ex-situ deposition

116

Chapter 6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

process [414]. Here, we aim to investigate, how the ferromagnetic exchange bias
at the direct SC/FM-interface impacts the magnon-photon coupling.
(ii) In analogy to the experiments in Refs. [79, 80], for our second deposition
process, we insert an insulating buffer layer between resonator and FM bar. Here,
we select AlN [161] due to the expected good magnetic properties of CoFe grown
on nitrides [122] in contrast to CoFe grown on oxides like e.g. SiO2. Again,
we deposit a trilayer comprising CoFe(30 nm)/Cu(3 nm)/Ta( 3nm) on top of the
insulating layer. (iii) As a reference, one superconducting on-chip NbTiN resonator
is not covered with a magnetic bar.
To characterize the magnetic properties of
CoFe ex-situ grown on NbTiN and in-situ
FM
grown on AlN, we deposit the CoFe(30 nm)/
bar
Cu(3 nm)/Ta( 3nm) on unpatterned NbTiN referHext
ence chips from the UD with and without the
insertion of the AlN buffer layer. These chips are
200 µm
80 µm
fabricated within the same deposition run as the
Fig. 6.6. – Illustration of the FM- FM bars of our magnon-photon hybrid samples
bar deposited on the inductive and hence allow for the characterization of magelement of the superconducting netic loss rate κ , though micropatterning of the
s
resonator. In our experiments,
an external magnetic field Hext FM bars might deteriorate the magnetic properis applied along the long axis of ties [79]. The reference chips are then investigated
the FM bar (green arrow).
in ip-bbFMR experiments at room temperature.
Their resulting Hres and ∆H is plotted in Fig. 6.7(a)
and (b), respectively.
For the resonance field Hres in panel (a), we find a slightly different evolution
with frequency for the two reference samples, which indicates that the different
used seedlayers have affected their magnetic properties. We fit Hr ( f ) to the ipKittel equation via Eq. (2.26) and find a reduced µ0 Meff ≃ 2.0 T for the sample,
where CoFe has been ex-situ deposited on NbTiN compared to the µ0 Meff ≃ 2.3 T
for the sample, where CoFe has been in-situ deposited on the protective AlN
buffer layer. We note that the Meff of the latter is in good agreement to literature
values [135, 389, 390]. We attribute the reduced Meff of the CoFe on NbTiN
sample to the diffusion of oxygen into the CoFe layer. From the inset in panel (a),
we find a different expected resonance field for the superconducting resonator
resonance frequency µ0 Hres ( f r ) of the two samples [see star symbols of the inset
in Fig. 6.7(a)]. For the FMR linewidth ∆H in Fig. 6.7(b), we observe a non-linear
evolution in ∆H ( f ) for both samples. This can be attributed to a temperature
dependent magnetic relaxation process (see Sec. 2.3.3) or two-magnon scattering
processes [114–116]. At f r , we extract magnetic relaxation rates κs = γ∆H/(4π)
of κsNbTiN/CoFe /(2π) ≈ (231 ± 3) MHz and κsAlN/CoFe /(2π) ≈ (108 ± 2) MHz [see
star symbols in Fig. 6.7(b)].

6.2

Magnon-Photon coupling in thin-film devices

117

(a )

0 .0 3

0 .2

µ 0H

re s

(m T )

0 .0 2
0 .1

0 .0 1
4 .5

µ 0 ∆H ( m T )

0 .0
4 0

5 .0

5 .5

N b T iN /C o F e /C u /T a
N b T iN /A lN /C o F e /C u /T a

(b )

2 0

0

o p tim iz e d C o F e

0

5

1 0

1 5

2 0

f (G H z )

Fig. 6.7. – Ferromagnetic resonance field Hres (a) and linewidth ∆H of the CoFe thin films
deposited on NbTiN grown in the Ultradisk (red) and the AlN buffer layer (green) as
function of frequency recorded at RT in an external magnetic field applied in the sample
plane along the long axis of the magnetic bar. In panel (a), the inset displays the range
around f r ≃ 5 GHz. Continuous lines represent fits to Eq. (2.26). To compare the observed
FMR-linewidth in panel (b) to that of CoFe grown under optimized growth conditions
following Ref. [135](black dots). Star symbols in panels (a) and (b) represent the data
points at the frequency of the superconducting microwave resonator ( f r ≃ 5 GHz).

These magnetic relaxation rates are comparable to those of Py in Refs. [79, 80]
but are higher than what would be expected for CoFe grown under optimal
conditions [135, 389, 390]. The black data points in Fig. 6.7(b) represent the RT-ip
FMR-linewidth of a 30 nm thick CoFe film grown in a Pt/Cu/CoFe/Cu/Ta layer
stack, which has been found to exhibit ultralow Gilbert damping in Ref. [135]
together with a linear fit to Eq. (2.28) (black line) yielding a Gilbert damping of
α ≈ 5 · 10−3 . For this sample, we extract an optimal magnetic relaxation rate of
opt.CoFe
κs
/(2π) ≈ 33 ± 2 MHz at f r = 5 GHz. Since it is possible to grow CoFe
with good magnetic properties on nitrides [122], we attribute the deteriorated
magnetic properties of our thin films to a roughening of the NbTiN base layer due
to oxidization (see also Fig. 6.2). While oxidized 3d transition metals can exhibit a
more complicated temperature-dependence due to antiferromagnetic phases [137],
we nonetheless assume a temperature-robust κs for these samples in agreement
with our experiments in Refs. [122, 433].
For the superconducting resonator/ferromagnetic bar hybrid sample discussed in the following, we did not deposit any FM bar on the NbTiN resonator
R1 (acting as the reference) and deposited the FM bars made from AlN/CoFe on
two resonators R2 and R4 as well as CoFe on resonators R3 and R5. The finalized

118

Chapter 6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

chip is mounted in a copper sample box and inserted into the 17T cryostat using
the measurement configuration depicted in Fig. 3.6(a). An overview scan for
the recorded microwave transmission |S21 |( f ) as function of f at T = 3 K in the
unordered state of the magnetic CoFe layer at a microwave power corresponding
to the high power regime is shown in Fig. 6.8.

-3 6

R 4

|S 2 1 | (d B )

R 2

-3 8
R 1
R 3

-4 0

R 5
4 .4

4 .6

4 .8

5 .0

5 .2

f (G H z )

Fig. 6.8. – Microwave transmission spectra of the five on-chip NbTiN superconducting
resonators recorded at T = 3.0 K, µ0 Hext = 0 mT and at a microwave power corresponding
to the high power regime. Continuous lines represent fits to Eq. (3.18). R1 is the bare
reference resonator (blue), resonators R2 and R4 are coupled to CoFe strips grown on
AlN (green), whereas resonators R3 and R5 are coupled to CoFe strips grown directly on
the NbTiN layer (red).

Three distinct absorption dips can be identified for both the bare NbTiN
resonator R1 (blue) and the resonators R3 and R5, which are directly coupled to
the CoFe bar (red), whereas the resonators R2 and R4 exhibit weak absorption
dip indicative of undercoupled resonators with Qext  Qint . We interpret this as
a reduced Qint for all resonators due to the additional performed micropatterning
steps deteriorating the MA-interface. In this picture, the resonators R3 and R5
remain critically coupled to the transmission line despite the reduced Qint due
to a strong reduction in Qext from the ferromagnetic exchange-field-mediated
direct coupling between FM bar and superconducting resonator constituting an
additional external loss channel for the microwave photons in the resonator. The
individual resonators are fitted to Eq. (3.18) to extract the quality factors. The
fitting results, depicted as continuous lines in Fig. 6.8, are listed in Tab. 6.3.
We observe in Tab. 6.3 strongly reduced Qint ≃ 2 · 103 of our resonators
compared to those in Sec. 6.1. Besides the additional losses from the roughened
MA interface due to the additional fabrication steps, we note that a degradation
of the used NbTiN sputtering target in the Ultradisk has been found in Ref. [434],
which strongly reduced the achievable Qint values and thus the achieved results
in this section. As discussed previously, the reduced Qext of resonators R3 and
R5 originates from external losses induced by the exchange bias in the FM bar,
whereas the strong variation between the Qext of the resonators R1, R2 and R4 is
attributed to the imprecise fitting of undercoupled resonators to Eq. (3.18).

6.2

Magnon-Photon coupling in thin-film devices

119

Resonator
R1 (bare)
R2 (AlN/CoFe)
R3 (NbTiN/CoFe)
R4 (AlN/CoFe)
R5 (NbTiN/CoFe)

fr (GHz)
4.642
4.762
4.897
4.997
5.066

Q (×103 )
2.11±0.01
0.62±0.02
1.54±0.01
1.32±0.08
1.33±0.06

Qint (×103 )
2.49±0.01
0.64±0.02
2.32±0.01
1.35±0.08
2.14±0.01

Qext (×103 )
12.00±0.01
31.40±0.42
4.55±0.01
72.31±1.59
3.53±0.01

Tab. 6.3. – Extracted fitting parameters for resonance frequency f r , the quality factors Q,
Qint and Qext for the five on chip NbTiN resonators coupled to the magnetic CoFe bars.
Measurements are performed at T = 3.0 K, µ0 Hext = 0 mT and at a microwave power
corresponding to the high power regime.

To characterize the magnon-photon coupling of our resonators, we record S21
for frequencies around the f r of the individual resonators at varying in-plane external magnetic field Hext applied along the long axis of the FM bars [see Fig. 3.6(a)]
sweeping from positive to negative field values through the ferromagnetic resonance field of the ferromagnetic CoFe bar. The resulting microwave absorption
spectra for resonators R1 to R5 are plotted as colormaps as function of f and Hext
in Fig. 6.9(a)-(e). The corresponding range in |S21 | for each resonator is listed in
Tab. 6.4.

min(|S21 |) (10−3 )
max(|S21 |) (10−3 )

R1 (a)
13.2
15.6

R2 (b)
13.0
15.3

R3 (c)
12.5
15.0

R4 (d)
12.8
14.9

R5 (e)
12.9
14.9

Tab. 6.4. – Minimum and maximum transmission parameter min(|S21 |) and max(|S21 |)
for the panels (a)-(e) of in Fig. 6.9.

For the uncoupled resonator R1 in Fig. 6.9(a), we observe a slight reduction
in f r and a roughly constant microwave absorption magnitude in |S21 | indicating a weakly affected Qint within the investigated magnetic-field range. These
findings are agreement with the robustness of our NbTiN resonators observed in
Fig. 6.4. Notably, the observed dispersion in f r ( Hext ) is not symmetric in Hext [see
Fig. 6.11(a)], which we attribute to a finite trapped flux Φtr in the superconducting
magnetic coils. For the resonators R2 and R4 in panels (b) and (d), where the CoFe
bar is deposited on top of an insulating AlN layer, we observe an anticrossing
feature resonator mode at small positive fields for µ0 Hext ≃ +10 mT (white dashed
line), which we attribute to the resonator mode coupling to the positive branch
of the magnetic Kittel mode as accounting for the trapped flux Φtr ≈ −5 mT, this
µ0 Hext roughly corresponds to the expected resonance field at f ≃ 5 GHz [i.e.
µ0 Hext ≈ µ0 Hres + Φtr , see also Fig. 6.7(a)].
For negative fields smaller than µ0 Hext ≃ −28 mT, the unperturbed resonator
mode is restored, however no anticrossing from the resonator mode coupling

120

Chapter 6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

|S 2 1 |
m in ( |S 2 1 |)

f-fR 5 (M H z )

f-fR 4 (M H z )

f-fR 3 (M H z )

f-fR 2 (M H z )

f-fR 1 (M H z )

-3 5 .3 8

1 0

-3 5 .5 3

-3 5 .6 8

-3 5 .8 4

-3 5 .9 9

-3 6 .1 4

-3 6 .2 9

-3 6 .4 4

-3 6 .6 0

-3 6 .7 5

-3 6 .9 0

-3 7 .0 5

-3 7 .2 0

-3 7 .3 6

-3 7 .5 1

-3 7 .6 6

-3 7 .8 1

-3 7 .9 6

m a x ( |S 2 1 |)
-3 8 .1 2

-3 8 .2 7

(a )

R 1

(b )

R 2

(c )

R 3

(d )

R 4

(e )

R 5

-3 8 .4 2

-0
-1 0
1 0
-0
-1 0
1 0
0
-1 0
1 0
-0
-1 0
1 0
0
-1 0
-1 0 0

-5 0

0
µ 0H

e x t ( m

5 0

1 0 0

T )

Fig. 6.9. – Microwave transmission spectra of the NbTiN superconducting resonators
coupled to the CoFe strips as a function of external magnetic field µ0 Hext applied in the
sample plane along the long axis of the FM bar (cf. Fig. 6.6) and frequency f around the
respective f Ri of the individual resonators (see Tab.6.3) recorded at T = 3 K and a power
corresponding to the high power range. (a) Spectrum of a bare NbTiN resonator (indicated
with blue color). In (b) and (d), resonators R2 and R4 (green color) are coupled to
CoFe(30 nm)/Cu(3 nm)/Ta( 3nm) deposited on top of a 30 nm thick AlN layer. Resonators
R3 and R5 (red color) in (c) and (e) are coupled to a CoFe(30 nm)/Cu(3 nm)/Ta( 3nm)-bar,
which is ex-situ deposited directly on the NbTiN resonator. The corresponding range in
|S21 | for each resonator is listed in Tab. 6.4. Vertical white dashed lines indicate the positive
and negative resonance field positions µ0 Hres of the CoFe bar. These are offset by about
≃ −5 mT from the zero-field position due to trapped flux Φtr in the superconducting
magnet coils.

6.2

Magnon-Photon coupling in thin-film devices

121

to the negative branch of the Kittel mode is observed. We attribute this to
a hysteresis in the magnetic order of the FM bar induced by the field-sweep
direction of our measurement routine, where Hext is swept from positive to
negative fields. Consequently, the magnetization of CoFe is in an ordered state at
positive fields, which can coherently couple with the resonator mode but, when
reversing the magnetic field polarity, its magnetic moments do not fully align
along the external magnetic field at low negative fields due to the shape anisotropy
of the magnetic bars, which gives rise to a much lower coupling strength for the
negative branch and thereby to an asymmetry in the evolution of the resonator
mode with respect to Hext . Note that such an asymmetry in the resonator modes
of hybrid magnon-photon systems as function of magnetic field sweep direction
has also been observed in Ref. [79]. For the resonators R3 and R5, where the
CoFe is deposited directly on top of the NbTiN layer, we observe in Fig. 6.9(c)
and (e), continuous uninterrupted resonator modes, which do however exhibit a
kink at µ0 Hext ≃ +20 mT (white dashed line). We again attribute this feature to
the microwave photons of the resonator coupling with the ferromagnetic Kittel
mode of the CoFe bar [see µ0 Hext of this sample in Fig. 6.7(a)]. However, for these
samples, the enhanced magnetic relaxation rate appears to exceed the effective
coupling rate geff between magnons and phonons and hence no anticrossing
between magnon and photon mode is observed.

1 7

(a )

R 4

(b )

R 5

1 6

1 5

1 4

-4 0

-2 0

0

e x t=

µ 0H

µ 0H

e x t=

1 0 0 m T

2 0

4 0

f-fR 4 , 1 0 0 m T (M H z )

|S 2 1 | ( 1 0 -3 )

|S 2 1 | ( 1 0 -3 )

1 6
re s + F tr

µ 0H

1 2

-4 0

-2 0

0

re s + F tr

µ 0H

e x t=

µ 0H

µ 0H

e x t=

1 0 0 m T

2 0

4 0

f-fR 5 , 1 0 0 m T (M H z )

Fig. 6.10. – Vertical cuts for |S21 ( f )| from the colormaps in Fig. 6.9 for resonators R4 (a)
and R5 (b) for magnetic fields, which are on/off-resonant with the magnetic Kittel mode.
Light (Dark) coloring represent data for magnetic fields, which are on (off)-resonant with
the magnetic Kittel mode. Continuous lines represent fits to a Lorentzian function.

In Fig. 6.10, we plot exemplary raw data cuts through |S21 ( f )| from the
colormaps in Fig. 6.9 for the resonators R4 [panel (a)] and R5 [panel (b)] for
magnetic fields, which are off-resonant (µ0 Hext = 100 mT, light colors) and onresonant (µ0 Hext = µ0 Hres + Φtr , dark colors) with the magnetic Kittel mode. We
find, that in particular for resonator R4, the linewidth of the observed Lorentzian
around f R4 is greatly enhanced for µ0 Hext = µ0 Hres + Φtr and a strong shift in
resonance frequency is apparent. Due to this strongly enhanced linewidth of the
resonator mode in resonance with the magnetic Kittel mode, the fitting of the

122

Chapter 6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

raw |S21 ( f )|-spectra with Eq. (3.18) yielded unreliable fitting result. Hence, to
reduce the amount of fitting parameter we decided to fit the data with a simple
Lorentzian function (see continuous lines in Fig. 6.10) to extract f r and κ as function
of Hext for our individual resonators. The resulting resonance frequency and net
relaxation rates as function of external magnetic field are plotted in Fig. 6.11 for
the resonators R1, R4 and R5, which represent the three different investigated
resonator types. Here, the net quality factor Q is related to the relaxation rate of
the magnon-photon hybrid devices κ via Eq. (3.14).
(a )
6

6

(b )

R 1

R 1

κ/ ( 2 π) ( M H z )

f - f R 1 ,1 0 0 m T ( M H z )

N b T iN
3

-0

4

2

0
(c )

6

(d )

R 4

R 4

0

κ/ ( 2 π) ( M H z )

f - f R 4 ,1 0 0 m T ( M H z )

C o F e

-3

4

N b T iN

-6

2

0
(e )

6

(f)

R 5

κ/ ( 2 π) ( M H z )

f - f R 5 ,1 0 0 m T ( M H z )

3

0

-3

R 5

4

2

0
-1 0 0

-5 0

0
µ 0H

e x t ( m

5 0

1 0 0

T )

-1 0 0

-5 0

0
µ 0H

e x t ( m

5 0

1 0 0

T )

Fig. 6.11. – Resonance frequency f r and relaxation rate κ of the three different resonator
heterostructure types as function of the external magnetic field Hext . Panels (a) and (b)
depict f r and κ of the bare NbTiN resonator. Panels (c) and (d) show f r and κ for the hybrid
device, where the CoFe bar has been grown on an AlN buffer layer. Around ± Hres + Φtr
of the Kittel mode for the CoFe bar (gray dashed lines), we observe a discontinuity in f r
and an large increase in κ generated by the mode hybridization due to magnon-photon
coupling. A similar behavior is observed for the f r and κ of the CoFe on NbTiN hybrid
device in panels (e) and (f). Light blue lines in panels (c), (e) and (d), (f) represent fits to
Eqs.(2.48) and (2.49), respectively.

For the uncoupled resonator in Fig. 6.11, we observe a quadratic reduction
of f r with Hext in panel (a) and an approximately constant κ in panel (b). This

6.2

Magnon-Photon coupling in thin-film devices

123

behavior is in agreement with our observations in Fig. 6.4. For the NbTiN/AlN/CoFe hybrid sample R4, we observe discontinuities in f r in panel (c), where the
resonator mode intersects the positive and negative branch of the ferromagnetic
Kittel mode, as indicated by the gray dashed lines in Fig. 6.11. At the same Hext ,
we observe the strong increase of its relaxation rate κ in panel (d). The raw data for
f r and κ of R4 are fitted to Eqs.(2.48) and (2.49), respectively, to extract the effective
magnon-photon coupling rate geff . The resulting fits are shown as continuous
light blue lines in Fig. 6.11(c) and (d). Using κsAlN/CoFe /(2π) ≈ (108 ± 2) MHz
[see Fig. 6.7(b)], κrAlN/CoFe /(2π) ≈ (0.99 ± 0.01) MHz [see Fig. 6.11(d)] and f r =
4.997 GHz (see Tab.6.3), we extract an effective coupling rate of geff /(2π) =
(120 ± 4) MHz indicating, that the magnon-photon coupling of resonator R4 is
situated in the strong coupling regime with geff > κr , κs , though κs is just slightly
2 / (κ κ ) ≈ 136. Both the vallower than geff . We extract a cooperativity of C = geff
r s
ues of geff and C of R4 are in good agreement to findings on the magnon-photon
coupling between superconducting resonators and nanomagnets in Refs. [79, 80].
Notably, in our experiments, we benefit from the enhanced temperature-robustness
of NbTiN and achieve strong magnon-photon coupling at T = 3 K in a liquid
helium cryostat, whereas both Refs. [79, 80] have performed their experiments at
T ≃ 1.5 K. The coupling strength g0 of photons to a single Bohr magneton is given
√
by g = g0 / N, where N is the number of spins in our micropatterned CoFe strip.
We use a molar mass MCoFe = 0.25MCo + 0.75MFe ≈ 58.2 u [435], where u is the
atomic mass unit, a density of ρCoFe = 8110 kg/m3 [436] and a volume of the FM
microstrip of V = 400 × 11 × 0.03 µm3 and thereby obtain a number of spins of
N = 1.14 · 1013 resulting in a coupling rate per Bohr magneton µB of g0 ≈ 223 Hz5 ,
which is in good agreement with the lumped element Nb resonators in Ref. [80]
and one order of magnitude larger than the g0 for coplanar resonators in Ref. [79]
due to the reduced mode volume of lumped-element resonators. For the resonator
R5, where the FM bar is directly deposited on the NbTiN resonator, we observe in
Figs. 6.11(e) and (f) peak-dip features in f r and minor enhancements in κ around
20/ − 30 mT, which we attribute to the microwave photons in the resonator coupling with the two branches of the magnonic Kittel mode. Notably, in comparison
to R4, these coupling features manifest at larger Hext , which we attribute to the
reduced Meff and correspondingly the enhanced Hres of CoFe ex-situ grown on
NbTiN [see Fig. 6.7(a)]. Due to the enhanced κsNbTiN/CoFe /(2π) ≈ (231 ± 3) MHz
of the CoFe in NbTiN/CoFe hybrid devices, we expect to operate the device
in the Purcell-enhanced regime [149] with κr < geff < κs . In this regime, we
expect the magnon-photon coupling to manifest as an effectively Purcell enhanced
relaxation rate κ and a peak-dip dispersion in f r [78, 437], which is in agreement
with what we observe for resonator R5 in Figs. 6.11(e) and (f). A fit of f r and κ
5 Note, that in literature, g

0 is commonly referred to as the coupling rate per spin [79, 80]. However,
since in this work we are working with 3d transition metal itinerant ferromagnets, the term
coupling rate per Bohr magnetron is the physically sound term for our experiments.

124

Chapter 6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

to Eqs.(2.48) and (2.49) using κsNbTiN/CoFe /(2π) ≈ (231 ± 3) MHz [see Fig. 6.7(b)],
κr = 1.50 MHz [see Fig. 6.11(f)] and f r = 5.066 GHz (see Tab.6.3) yields a reduced
geff = (67 ± 8) MHz. We note, that the evolution of κ in Fig. 6.11(f) is not well
described by the performed fit and the broad and asymmetric evolution of κ ( Hext )
cannot be described with Eq. (2.49). Hence, we expect the out-of-plane flux and
exchange-coupling of the domain state in the CoFe bar at low magnetic fields Hext
to enhance the losses and increase the loss rate κ in resonator R5. In this picture,
the asymmetrically enhanced κ in particular for small negative Hext is caused by
the measurement routine, where Hext is swept from positive to negative values
and the corresponding positive trapped flux Φtr in the superconducting coils shifts
the peak in κ at the domain state of the CoFe bar to negative Hext . Overall, the enhanced κsNbTiN/CoFe and reduced geff for resonator R5 renders the performance of
the NbTiN/CoFe-hybrid devices to be inferior to the NbTiN/AlN/CoFe-hybrids.
Hence, we infer, that a direct SC/FM contact layer cannot enhance coupling between magnetic moments and microwave photons potentially due to the formation
of an interfacial dead layer at the NbTiN/CoFe-interface, which would explain
the deteriorated magnetic properties for this sample.

6.3 Summary and Outlook
In summary, in this chapter, we have optimized the fabrication process
of planar microwave resonators made from the dirty type II superconductor
NbTiN, which exhibits a high Tc ≃ 16 K and robustness to external magnetic
field ( κGL > 50). The NbTiN thin films for our resonators are grown via reactive
sputtering deposition in the Ultradisk sputtering machine on thermally oxidized Si
and highly resistive Si (001) substrates using different substrate surface treatment
procedures to mitigate TLS losses from the metal-substrate interface MS. The
finalized resonators are then compared for their internal quality factors Qint at
T = 2.2 K. We find Qint ≃ 2 · 105 for resonators grown on Si-substrates, regardless
of the performance of a buffered oxide etch substrate treatment prior to the
NbTiN deposition and a strongly reduced Qint ≃ 1 · 104 for resonators grown on
the thermally oxidized Si-substrates. These results demonstrate, that dielectric
TLS losses from the MS-interface constitute the dominant loss channels that limits
Qint in our resonators. The obtained Qint for NbTiN grown on Si are one order of
magnitude higher than those reported in previous publications from the WMI for
comparable resonator layouts based on superconducting Nb [382, 415]. Regarding
ESR and FMR applications, we demonstrated the usability of our resonators
at elevated temperatures of up to T ≤ 13 K and magnetic in-plane fields up
to µ0 Hext ≤ 440 mT with a Qint > 105 for T ≤ 4.8 K and µ0 Hext ≤ 180 mT.
For their integration in qubit devices operating at millikelvin temperatures, our
NbTiN resonators exhibit Qint ≈ 5 · 105 in the high power limit and Qint ≈ 2 · 105
in the single photon limit. Using the optimized fabrication recipe, we couple

6.3 Summary and Outlook

125

our superconducting resonators to the magnons of a micropatterned CoFe strip
and characterize the resulting magnon-photon coupling for two types of hybrid
devices, where 30 nm of the low damping ferromagnetic metal Co25Fe75(CoFe) is
deposited (i) on top of an AlN insulating layer to avoid direct exchange coupling
between FM and SC, (ii) directly on the NbTiN resonator. For the former, we
observe magnon-photon in the strong coupling regime with a coupling rate of
geff /(2π) = (120 ± 4) MHz resulting in an estimated vacuum coupling rate per
2 / (κ κ ) ≈ 136.
µB of g0 ≈ 223 Hz and a cooperativity of a cooperativity of C = geff
r s
Due to an enhanced magnetic relaxation rate κs from the deteriorated growth
of CoFe on NbTiN for the latter type, we find the signatures of coupling in the
Purcell-enhanced regime (κr < geff < κs ), where the magnon-photon coupling
manifests primarily as an enhanced relaxation rate κ in our hybrid. The observed
coupling rates geff and cooperativities C of our NbTiN/AlN/CoFe hybrid devices
are in good agreement with contemporary research in Refs. [79, 80]. However,
our experiments have been performed at higher base temperatures T = 3 K and
using the temperature- and magnetic field-robust superconductor NbTiN with a
high g0 due to the small volume of the used lumped element resonator layout.
Magnon-photon hybrid systems are discussed as high-speed coherent transducers
for circuit quantum electrodynamics [79, 438] and for the transmission of spin
excitations via photons [439, 440]. Our results help to push these hybrids to higher
operating temperatures and smaller volumes. Working with metallic ferromagnets,
future efforts should attempt to reduce the observed sizable κs for CoFe in hybrid
devices for example by inserting a buffer layer between the AlN and CoFe or by
omitting the buffered oxide etch before NbTiN deposition to obtain resonators
with reduced surface roughness (see Fig. 6.1) as the base layer for the growth of
CoFe.

126

Chapter 6

Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting microwave

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk
acoustic wave resonator/
magnetic thin films hybrids

7

Having investigated the coupling of magnons in magnetic thin films to microwave
photons in superconducting resonators in the previous chapter, we here investigate the coupling of magnons to a different kind of quasiparticle excitations,
namely to transverse acoustic phonons in bulk acoustic wave (BAW) resonators.
The coupling can be realized by the finite magnetoelastic coupling in magnetic
materials. Here, our introduction to this field is oriented towards the one in
our recent article entitled Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in ferromagnetic
metal - bulk acoustic resonator hybrids [71]. Phonons, the quantized excitations of
elastic waves in solids, are of relevance for a vast variety of solid-state phenomena.
Recently, they have in particular drawn attention in the field of quantum sciences
due to the prospect to use phonons in hybrid quantum memory [441–444], quantum transducer [445–450], and quantum sensor devices [451–455]. Currently, the
main research focus is oriented towards use of standing elastic waves generated
in mechanical resonators with high quality factors [375, 456]. These standing
elastic waves can be viewed as analog to standing electromagnetic waves in
resonators. They are most commonly realized in the form of high harmonic
overtone bulk acoustic wave (BAW) [457, 458] or surface acoustic wave (SAW)
resonators [441,442,459,460]. These acoustic wave resonators support both linearly
polarized longitudinal and transversal (shear) elastic standing waves carrying
no angular momentum. However, suitable superpositions of shear waves can
also mediate angular momentum [461–463]. This allows for the transfer of spin
information by phonons as well as the conversion between circularly polarized
and linearly polarized shear waves. In analogy to the utilization of electron spins
in electrical spin valve devices, spin currents carried by phonons allow for the
realization of phononic spin valves [77, 158]. Experiments aiming to investigate
the concept of phononic spin currents require schemes for the excitation and
detection of phonons with circular polarization. To this end, the intrinsic chirality of the magnetic Kittel mode (see e.g. Fig. 2.2) in combination with the
magnetoelastic interaction represents an experimentally simple approach for the
generation and detection of phonons [464–467]. Here, in particular magnetic thin
films with a sizable magnetostriction constant λ, while retaining a low Gilbert

127

damping α6 coupled to a BAW resonator with low elastic relaxation rate ηa , allowing to carry long-lived excitations at high overtone frequencies, constitute
an ideal experimental platform to study the excitation of phonons with angular
momentum [64, 77, 112, 157–159, 468, 469]. While early experiments [77, 158, 159]
have used the ultra-low magnetization damping material yttrium iron garnet
(YIG) grown lattice matched on gadolinium gallium garnet (Gd3Ga5O12, GGG)
substrates, the following experimental aspects have not yet been investigated: (i)
What requirements must the phonon dispersion relations of a given crystalline
symmetry of the host BAW material fulfill to allow for the transport of angular
momentum or the interconversion between chiral to linear polarized phonons? (ii)
Can the individual phonon modes participating in the phonon spin transport be
experimentally resolved? (iii) Is the excitation concept using the ferromagnetic Kittel mode unique for epitaxial YIG films on GGG substrates, which are excellently
matched in terms of their acoustic impedance Z, or can it be generalized to other
material systems irrespective of the presence of epitaxial FM/BAW substrate interface, for example polycrystalline metallic thin films coupled to arbitrary crystalline
substrates including materials such as silicon (Si) and sapphire (Al2O3), which
are commonly used in the semiconductor industry, irrespective of the acoustic
impedance matching at the FM/BAW substrate interface?
These are the central questions, we aim to answer in this chapter, where we
investigate the magnetoelastic coupling between polycrystalline ferromagnetic
metallic (FM) Co25Fe75 (CoFe) thin films and several crystalline BAW substrate materials. In Section 7.1, we experimentally demonstrate that, besides YIG on GGG,
magnon-phonon hybrid devices incorporating polycrystalline metallic magnetic
thin films are well suited for the excitation of high overtone BAWs in crystalline
Al2O3, GGG and Si substrates. This finding provides clear evidence that the
excitation scheme of using the chirality of the Kittel mode to inject phonons in
magnetostrictive materials is generic. In detail, in our experiments, we study
the coupling between the resonant interaction of the ferromagnetic excitations
with the standing elastic waves of the BAW resonators by performing cryogenic
bbFMR(see Sec. 3.3.1). Using this method, we find that at least two propagation
velocities or phonon modes must be considered in our substrates, which suggests
that the phonon propagation direction with respect to crystallographic axes of the
host substrate is of key importance for the efficient transport and conversion of
angular momentum via phonons in the host substrate. In analogy to optics, we
call this process phononic birefringence [470], which establishes novel concepts
for the transformation and control of chiral phonon modes.
Our initial bbFMR-experiments on ferromagnetic metal/BAW resonator
hybrids using various substrate materials and observing the manifestation of
6 Note, that a large λ enables an efficient transfer of excitations from the spin to the phononic

system resulting in an increased Gilbert damping [110, 112, 468]. Hence, a compromise between
these contradicting requirements for the FM material needs to be found.

128

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

phononic birefringence, which are presented in Sec. 7.1, are available on the arxiv:
M. Müller, J. Weber, F. Engelhardt, V.A.S.V. Bittencourt, T. Luschmann, M. Cherkasski,
S.T.B. Goennenwein, S. Viola Kusminskiy, S. Geprägs, R. Gross, M. Althammer, H.
Huebl Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in ferromagnetic metal - bulk acoustic
resonator hybrids, arxiv: 2303.08429, (2023) [71].
Having experimentally demonstrate the suitability of polycrystalline metallic
thin films for magnon-phonon hybrid devices, in the following Sec. 7.2, we provide
a detailed study on the frequency and temperature dependence of the effective
magnetoelastic coupling rate geff as well as the relaxation rates of the magnetic
and elastic systems κs and ηa for the magnetic thin film/Al2O3 host crystal hybrid
sample.
Here, the performance of our magnon-phonon hybrids at cryogenic temperatures is of particular interest, as the reduced acoustic loss rates [471, 472] in
combination with the increased magnetoelastic coupling constant B [473] allow to
push these devices into stronger coupling regimes such as the Purcell-enhanced- or
potentially even the strong coupling regime [149]. Furthermore, a strong frequency
dependence of the effective magnetoelastic coupling rate has been demonstrated
in Refs. [159, 160]. Consequently, a study of both these experimental parameters
allow for the identification of an optimal working point for these hybrid devices.
Finally, we also assess the potential of the phononic signatures in the FMR for the
realization of highly sensitive strain and stress sensing applications.
The presented results for the temperature and frequency dependence of
the magnetic thin film/Al2O3 host crystal hybrid sample, presented in Sec. 7.2,
constitute the basis of a manuscript, which is under preparation at the writing
of this thesis. M. Müller, J. Weber, F. Engelhardt, M. Cherkasski, S. Sharma,
S.T.B. Goennenwein, S. Viola Kusminskiy, R. Gross, M. Althammer, H. Huebl
temperature dependence of magnon-phonon-polarons in a ferromagnetic metal with low
Gilbert damping, (202X).

7.1 Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in
ferromagnetic metal - bulk acoustic resonator
hybrids
In this section, we experimentally investigate the magnetoelastic coupling
between the ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) modes in a metallic Co25Fe75 thin
film and standing transverse elastic phonon modes in crystalline Al2O3, Si and
GGG substrates serving as the BAW resonators by performing cryogenic bbFMR
spectroscopy (see Sec. 3.3.1). For all of these substrate materials, we observe an
interaction between the resonant acoustic and magnetic modes. The acoustic

7.1 Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in CoFe/sapphire

129

modes correspond to specific propagation directions with respect to the crystallographic axes. We identify these phonon modes as two orthogonal transverse shear
waves propagating with slightly different velocities with relative differences in the
range ∆v/v ≃ 10−5 . In other words, in analogy to optics, we observe a phononic
birefringence for all substrate materials.

7.1.1 Qualitative discussion
We consider ferromagnetic metallic CoFe thin films deposited on crystalline
substrates with a hexagonal or cubic symmetry [see Fig. 7.1 (a)]. We then apply a
magnetic field Hext oriented along the film normal [z-direction in Fig. 3.4(a)] and
using a microwave drive, we resonantly excite the oop Kittel mode of the CoFe
layer. Due to the sizable magnetoelastic coupling (MEC) [55, 56, 77, 158, 159] in
CoFe, the magnetization dynamics generates a high frequency stress field and
thereby drives elastic modes exhibiting the same frequency and helicity as the
magnonic mode. As the magnetic thin film is elastically coupled to the substrate
serving as the BAW resonator, they can be considered as a singular elastic object
in which elastic waves are excited by the magnetization dynamics in the FM layer.
This process is called phonon pumping [112]. For the used sample oop-geometry
chosen for our experiment [see Fig. 7.1(a)], the excited phonons are exclusively
transverse acoustic phonons. This is due to the fact that the projection of the
magnetization vector M onto the field direction is constant in the linear regime
and as a result no longitudinal acoustic phonons are excited along the out-of-plane
direction z [112, 157]. Due to our experimental setting with a thin magnetic film
acting as transducer on top of a substrate, the properties of the standing waves
are dominated by the phonon dispersion relation of the substrate material, which
in turn are governed by the crystal structure of the substrate [86, 474, 475].
Owing to this acoustic wave excitation scheme, the generated phonons exhibit frequencies in the GHz range corresponding to wave numbers close to the
center of the Brillouin zone of the substrate, where the dispersion relation is to
a good approximation linear. Hence, phonon group and phase velocities can
be assumed to be identical and in the following, we will refer to the phonon
group velocity, when discussing the phonon velocities of the individual modes.
However, depending on the symmetry of the crystal, these velocities are usually
anisotropic, i.e., they depend on the propagation direction (z-direction in our
setting) relative to the crystallographic axis [see Fig. 7.1(b)], as described by the
Christoffel equation [476,477] and the polarization. Figures 7.1(b) and (c) show the
calculated longitudinal and transverse phonon propagation velocities of hexagonal
Al2O3 [478], which is calculated by solving the Christoffel equation [477]. We find
that the observed anisotropy of the velocities in the hexagonal lattice vector planes
reflects the symmetry of the underlying crystal structure. Notably, in Fig. 7.1(b),
the velocities of the two shear waves with a propagation direction z along the

130

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

vft

(b)

vst

P

L

cryst. substrate
z

Hext

M

d

v||a1,2 (km/s)

(a)

10

c

vl

θ

vft

a2

5 vst

z
φ

a1

CoFe

hrf

y

CPW

Al2O3

=120°⋅m
5

0
0

x

10

15

v||c (km/s)
(d)

6.18

10 vl

vt (km/s)

v||a2 (km/s)

(c)

vft
5 vst

6.17 vft
vst
6.16

10

Al2O3

=90°
(e)

a3

Al2O3

=120°⋅m

5.716

(f)

θ

z a

vl

1

a2

vft

φ

5 v

vt (km/s)

v||a2,3 (km/s)

0

5.715

vft
vst

st

0
0

=90°⋅m
5

10
v||a1 (km/s)

Si
15

5.714
0.0

Si
0.4

=90°⋅m
0.2
(°)

Fig. 7.1. – (a) Schematic of the magnon-phonon hybrid sample composed of a metallic
CoFe thin film grown on a crystalline substrate mounted on a coplanar waveguide.
The transverse acoustic waves can split into fast and slow modes with velocities vft
and vst , respectively (red and green arrows), and different polarization direction P
(blue arrows). (b) Group velocities of the longitudinal and transverse acoustic phonons
of hexagonal Al2O3 in the a1,2 -c-plane (ϕ = 120◦ · m, m ∈ [0, 2]). The length of the
vector from the origin to the colored lines gives the magnitude of the velocities and its
direction the propagation direction in the a1 -c-plane. The vector z defines the phonon
propagation direction with θ and ϕ representing the azimuthal and polar angles of z
with respect to the hexagonal lattice vectors c and a1 . (c) Phonon group velocities of Al2O3
in the a1 -a2 -plane for θ = 90◦ . (d) Calculated splitting of the fast and slow transverse
mode velocities vft and vst in Al2O3 as a function of azimuthal angle θ (ϕ = 120◦ · m,
m ∈ [0, 2]). (e) Group velocities of the longitudinal and transverse acoustic phonons of
cubic Si in the a1 -a2,3 -plane. The vector z defines the phonon propagation direction with
respect to the cubic lattice vectors ai (ϕ = 90◦ · m, m ∈ [0, 3]). (f) Calculated splitting of
vst and vft as a function of θ (ϕ = 90◦ · m, m ∈ [0, 3]).

7.1 Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in CoFe/sapphire

131

hexagonal c-direction are identical. However, if z is not parallel to the c-axis, this
degeneracy is lifted for arbitrarily small azimuthal angles θ between z and c as
plotted in Fig. 7.1(d). Here, we neglect the ϕ-dependence of vft and vst for small
θ-angles. However, note that this lifting in the degeneracy of phonon velocities
is not unique to hexagonal crystals. As an example for the transverse velocity
splitting in cubic crystals, we plot in Figures 7.1(e) and (f) the phonon velocity
anisotropy for Si (diamond structure) [479] and the small angle θ dependence,
respectively. Analytical expressions for the velocity splitting ∆vt as function of θ
of hexagonal and cubic crystals are derived in the Appendix G2.
As is depicted in Fig. 7.1(a), the propagating phonons meet reflective boundary conditions imposed by the finite thickness L + d ≃ L of the sample composed
of substrate (L) and magnetic thin film (d). This leads to the formation of standing
waves with frequencies in the MHz range and hence the whole sample consisting
of substrate and film can serve as a BAW resonator, which at GHz frequencies is
driven in the high-overtone regime. Here, the resonance frequency of an elastic
standing wave mode with mode number n can be well approximated by Eq. (2.50).
As we have established in Sec. 2.3.5, for FMR frequencies, which are in resonance
with one of the standing wave modes of the BAW resonator, it can excite the
elastic mode via MEC, which leads to a change of the FMR linewidth due to
phonon pumping [112, 157] at f n . Thus, we expect the FMR absorption line to
show a frequency-periodic modification, where the periodicity is given by the free
spectral range f FSR = f n+1 − f n = f 1 [77, 158, 159]. Notably, in this way, the FMR
absorption line is sensitive to all elastic modes, which can be excited with the
stress field created via MEC in the FM film. This fact is of relevance as commercial
substrate materials generally have a small but finite miscut angle θm between its
surface normal z and respective crystallographic axis.
Therefore, in principle, we expect to observe two non-degenerate propagation
velocities vft and vst along z, which manifest themselves as a superposition of
frequency periodic intersections of the FMR with periods given by the respective free spectral ranges f 1,ft and f 1,st , respectively, given that the linewidths of
both phononic modes are sufficiently narrow to resolve them. Notably, previous
works [77, 158, 159] did not account for this phenomenon and due to the increased
phononic linewidths at room temperature did not observe two individual phonon
modes. The experimental observation of two phonon modes via bbFMR experiments allows to determine the resonance spectra of the BAW resonator and, hence,
according to Eq. (2.50) the group velocities of both of the excited acoustic phonon
modes. Thus, this technique represents a technologically simple, but sensitive tool
for the characterization of these substrate BAW-resonators.

132

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

7.1.2 Experimental detection of phononic birefringence
Using the Superbowls sputtering system (see Sec. 3.1.2), we sputter deposit a
Pt(3 nm)/Cu(3 nm)/CoFe(30 nm)/Cu(3 nm)/Ta( 3nm) multilayer stack on a 510 µm
thick (0001)-oriented Al2O3 substrate, a 675 µm thick (001)-oriented high-resistivity
Si substrate, and a 380 µm (111)-oriented GGG substrate, which are each polished
on both sides. The seed layer of the CoFe film, composed of a Pt(3 nm)/Cu(3 nm)bilayer is required to generate optimal magnetization damping properties of
CoFe [135, 389, 390], whereas the top Cu(3 nm)/Ta(3 nm) capping bilayer protects
the CoFe thin film from oxidation. To analyze the MEC, we perform cryogenic
bbFMR experiments in the Moria cryostat (see Sec. 3.3.1), as we require magnetic
fields of up to ≃ 4.5 T in the oop-direction. The samples are mounted face-down
onto a coplanar waveguide and we record the frequency-dependent complex
microwave transmission parameter S21 as a function of the out-of-plane magnetic
field Hext at a temperature of T = 5 K using a VNA.
Fig. 7.2(a) shows the magnitude of the complex transmission parameter |S21 |
as a function of external magnetic field Hext around µ0 Hres ( f 0 ) ≈ 3.005 T and
microwave frequency f around f 0 = 18 GHz recorded at T = 5 K for the CoFe
multilayer stack deposited on an Al2O3 substrate. We observe the characteristic
FMR of the CoFe layer (brown color), which shows distinct, frequency periodic
horizontal features. We attribute these features to the magnon mode interacting
with the high overtone BAW mediated by MEC and elastic coupling at the interface
to the substrate (see Refs. [77, 159]). Regarding the frequency periodicity of the
features, we clearly observe a double peak structure at a free spectral range of
f FSR ≈ 6.04 MHz, which is in good agreement with the expected f FSR ≈ 6.05 MHz
from Eq. (2.50) in Al2O3 using the material parameters of CoFe and Al2O3 (d =
30 nm, L = 510 µm, vft,st ≈ 6.17 km/s and ṽt = 3.17 km/s [436]). As we are in the
linear regime of the phonon dispersion close to the center of the Brillouin zone,
the BAW resonance condition reads as f n = vt /λn , where λn is the wavelength of
the acoustic mode, which is fixed by the geometrical size of the BAW resonator.
The observation of two frequency-periodic modes suggests the coupling of the
magnonic Kittel mode with two non-degenerate transverse acoustic phonon with
a difference in velocity of ∆vt ∝ ∆ f ≃0.5 m/s. That is, the velocities vft and vst of
the two transverse acoustic phonon modes are not degenerate but show a finite
splitting. In our experiments, we are able to resolve this small difference in the
propagation velocities due to the narrow linewidth of the acoustic modes at low
temperatures. Hence, this mode splitting can also be observed in YIG on GGG
BAW resonators at cryogenic temperatures as confirmed by Johannes Weber in
his Master’s thesis [433]. In accordance to Ref. [159], we extract the uncoupled
linewidth of the two elastic modes from a linecut through S21 ( f − f 0 ) at a constant
external field µ0 Hext = 3.011 T, which is detuned from the FMR in the plotted
frequency range [orange vertical line in Fig. 7.2(a)]. Likewise, the uncoupled

7.1 Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in CoFe/sapphire

133

|S 2 1 | ( 1 0 -3 )

2 5

1 7

1 0
µ 0H

(b )

(a )

e x t=

3 .0 1 1 T

|S 2 1 | ( 1 0 -3 )

f-f0 (M H z )

2 4 .2
0

h
h

π

-2 0

0
µ 0(H

2 0
0

f-f0 (M H z )
(d )
7

µ 0 (∆H

0 + ∆H

µ 0 ∆H

0 =

s / γ

µ 0 ∆H

2 k

∆H

M E C )

2 0

-5

0
e x t- H

5
re s ) ( m T )

∆H

M E C 2

M E C 1

5
µ 0 ∆H

µ 0(H

2

re s ( f 0 ) ) ( m T )

(c )

2 5
|S 2 1 | ( 1 0 -3 )

e x t- H

(m T )

-1 0

∆f

2 3 .7

f0= 1 8 G H z

a 2

π

a 1

-1 0

0

fF S R
0

1 0

f-f0 (M H z )

Fig. 7.2. – (a) Microwave transmission parameter |S21 | as a function of frequency f − f 0
around f 0 = 18 GHz and external magnetic field Hext around µ0 Hres ( f 0 ) = 3.005 T
recorded at T = 5 K. Panel (b) shows a vertical cut through |S21 ( f )| along the orange
vertical line in (a) at the off-resonant external magnetic field µ0 Hext = 3.011 T to analyze
the unperturbed linewidth of the elastic modes. From this cut, we obtain the BAW
resonator decay rates ηa1,2 by fitting two lorentzian lines to the data (green and brown
lines). The blue arrow indicates the spacing of the two MEC features in the FMRlinewidth ∆ f . Panel (c) shows horizontal cuts |S21 ( Hext )| for the blue (magenta) horizontal
dashed lines in (a), which correspond to the resonant (off-resonant) case of the nth bulk
elastic resonance interacting with the Kittel mode. In resonance, we observe a linewidth
broadening ∆HMEC due to the MEC. In panel (d), the FMR-linewidth ∆H ( f ) is plotted as
a function of f . The gray dashed lines mark the free spectral range f FSR , the green and
brown dashed lines indicate the magnitude of the ∆HMEC and the light blue dashed line
represents the linear dispersion of ∆H with an offset Hinh (see Appendix G1).

134

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

FMR linewidth is extracted from a fixed frequency linescan detuned from the
acoustic modes [dashed horizontal magenta line in Fig. 7.2(a)]. The respective
data are presented in Fig. 7.2(b) and (c). We find the elastic relaxation rates
ηa1,2 /(2π) ≈ (0.23 ± 0.02) MHz, (0.16 ± 0.01) MHz and the magnetic relaxation
rate κs /(2π) ≈ (69.0 ± 0.1) MHz from the half-width at half maximum linewidth
of the elastic resonances and FMR, respectively. Notably, from the BAW decay
rates, we calculate an BAW decay length of δ1,2 = 2πvt /ηa1,2 ≈ 0.4 cm, 0.6 cm> 2L
at f 0 = 18 GHz which allows for the formation of standing waves in the Al2O3
substrate. In Fig. 7.2(d), we plot the FMR-linewidth ∆H as function of f around
f 0 . We observe an enhanced ∆H, when the magnetic Kittel mode is in resonance
with the elastic modes. Therefore, the study of the frequency-dependence of
∆H provides a very sensitive probe to detect phonon modes in our experiments
[∆vt /vt = ηa /(2π f 0 ) ≃ 10−5 comparable to Brillouin light spectroscopy [480]]. In
addition, the analysis of ∆H ( f ) allows us to investigate the intrinsic magnetization
damping mechanisms in CoFe as will be discussed in Sec. 7.2. The light blue
dashed line represents the uncoupled FMR-linewidth ∆H0 with Gilbert damping
α = (2.8 ± 0.1) · 10−3 and inhomogeneous broadening Hinh = (1.6 ± 0.3) mT. Both
α and Hinh are extracted from broadband FMR experiments on our hybrid sample
(see Appendix G1).
To quantify the effective coupling rate geff , we use Eq. (2.56) in combination
with the fitted elastic relaxation rates ηa,i of the two modes from Fig. 7.2(b) and
their observed resonant enhancement of the FMR-linewidth µ0 ∆HMEC1,2 from
Fig. 7.2(d). We obtain geff1,2 /(2π) = (4.02 ± 0.62) MHz, (4.55 ± 0.47) MHz at
2 / (2κ η
f 0 = 18 GHz and the corresponding cooperativities C1,2 = geff
s a1,2 ) =
(0.63 ± 0.09), (0.76 ± 0.10). To test the validity of our coupled harmonic oscillator
model from Sec. 2.3.5 for our magnon-phonon hybrid sample, we compare a
zoom-in of the experimentally recorded absorption spectrum from Fig. 7.2(a) in
Fig. 7.3(a) together with the calculated power absorption Pabs ∝ |m x + my |7 using
Eq. (2.52) and the fitted elastic and magnetic loss rates ηa1 /(2π) = 0.23 MHz,
ηa2 /(2π) = 0.16 MHz, κs /(2π) = 69.0 MHz from Fig. 7.2, the effective coupling
rates of geff1,2 /(2π) = 4.55 MHz, 4.02 MHz, the resonance frequencies f n1 =
18.0008 GHz and f n2 = 18.0023 GHz as well as ζ = 1 MHz and h+ = 1, which is
plotted in Fig. 7.3(b). We observe in Fig. 7.3 a good agreement between theory
model and the experimental data, demonstrating that the used model together
with the estimated effective coupling rate can well describe the experimentally
recorded spectrum. For the experimental spectrum, we observe a small dispersion
in the acoustic modes as function of µ0 Hext , which we attribute to a weak indirect
coupling of the two elastic modes via the ferromagnetic Kittel mode. Likewise, a
7 Note that in this model we need to divide the circular excitation of m+ into m x and my , which

exclusively couple to the two degenerate transverse phonons modes. This modification to the
model from Sec. 2.3.5 is valid, as we are free to define the x-y-coordinate system of the FMR
with respect to the polarization of the acoustic modes.

7.1 Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in CoFe/sapphire

135

|S 2 1 |
m a x ( |S 2 1 |/P a b s )
4

m in ( |S 2 1 |/P a b s )
e x p e r im e n t

f-f0 (M H z )

(a )

2

0
f0= 1 8 G H z
4

f-f0 (M H z )

(b )

m o d e l

2

0
f0= 1 8 G H z
3 .0 0 5

µ 0H

e x t( T

)

3 .0 0 9

Fig. 7.3. – (a) |S21 | recorded at T = 5 K and plotted as a function of f and Hext in the range
of Hres for f 0 = 18 GHz. (b) Simulation of Pabs obtained by solving Eq. (2.51) by m x + my
and plotted as a function of f and Hext in the range of Hres for f 0 = 18 GHz using the
parameters listed above. A good agreement between experiment and theory is observed.
The plotted power absorption range is (a) from min(|S21 |) = 0.016 to max(|S21 |) = 0.025
and (b) from min( Pabs ) = 0.24 · 106 to max( Pabs ) = 2.52 · 106 .

magnetic-field dependence of cavity modes via the ferromagnetic Kittel mode of
a YIG single crystal has been observed in Ref. [481].
As we find ηa,i < geff,i < κs , we operate our hybrid devices in a regime
analogous to the Purcell enhanced regime [149], where we can understand the
observed enhanced ∆H of the FMR mode in resonance with the elastic modes as
an effectively Purcell enhanced damping [78, 437].
In the following, we investigate the frequency dependence of the splitting
of the acoustic modes originating from the two different group velocities of the
transverse modes on a broader frequency scale. To this end, we plot in Fig. 7.4(a)
and (b) the microwave transmission magnitude |S21 | for CoFe thin films grown on
two both-sides polished, nominally c-axis oriented Al2O3 substrates with varying
miscut specifications from two different suppliers [(a) Crystec θm < 0.1◦ and (b)
UniversityWafer θm < 0.2◦ ] as function of frequency f − f 0 and Hext ( f 0 ) at T = 5 K
for varying f 0 ranging from 12 GHz to 30 GHz in steps of 6 GHz.

136

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

|S21|

max(|S21|)

f-f0 (MHz)

Δθ<0.1°

(a)

3
0

Δf

-3 f =12 GHz
(b)

3

30 GHz

24 GHz
Δθ<0.2°

18 GHz

0

f-f0 (MHz)

min(|S21|)

0
-3 12 GHz
-5

18 GHz
0

5

-5

30 GHz

24 GHz

0

5

-5

0

5

-5

0

5

µ0(Hext-Hres(f0)) (mT)

∆f (MHz)

6

(c)

∝∆vt

4

2

0

0

20

40
f0 (GHz)

Fig. 7.4. – (a) Microwave transmission magnitude |S21 | as a function of frequency f − f 0
and Hext ( f 0 ) in narrow intervals around f 0 and Hres ( f 0 ) recorded at T = 5 K for a CoFe
thin film deposited on a c-axis Al2O3 substrate with a miscut θm < 0.1◦ . Panel (b) shows
a second sample of CoFe on a c-axis Al2O3 substrate with a specified miscut of θm < 0.2◦ .
The values of Hres ( f 0 ) as well as min(|S21 |) and max(|S21 |) at the respective f 0 for both
samples are given in Tab. 7.1. Note that the frequency spacing of the panels in (a) and
(b) is 6 GHz. Panel (c) displays the observed frequency splitting ∆ f for both samples as
a function of f 0 (blue and purple circles) together with linear fits to extract the velocity
difference of the two transverse modes ∆vt .

7.1 Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in CoFe/sapphire

137

CoFe/Al2O3-sample from Fig. 7.4(a)
f0 (GHz)
µ0 Hres (T)
min(|S21 |) (10−3 )
max(|S21 |) (10−3 )

12
2.80
55
75

18
3.01
16
26

24
3.21
5.1
8.6

30
3.42
2.2
4.0

CoFe/Al2O3-sample from Fig. 7.4(b)
f0 (GHz)
µ0 Hres (T)
min(|S21 |) (10−3 )
max(|S21 |) (10−3 )

12
2.78
140
156

18
3.00
72
86

24
3.21
36
46

30
3.41
18
24

Tab. 7.1. – Plot parameters of the colormaps in Fig. 7.4(a) and (b). Frequency f , resonance
field µ0 Hres as well as minimum and maximum S21 -parameter min(|S21 |) and max(|S21 |).

We find that the frequency separation ∆ f of the BAW resonances from the
two phonon velocities scales linearly with f 0 for both CoFe/Al2O3 hybrid devices.
This is expected as
∆vt
∆ f = f nft − f nst =
(7.1)
λn
and λn decreases linearly with rising f 0 . The observed frequency-splitting ∆ f
of the two CoFe/Al2O3 hybrid samples as function of f 0 is plotted in Fig. 7.4(c).
From linear fits to ∆ f ( f 0 ) [continuous lines in Fig. 7.4(c)], we are able to extract
the velocity splitting ∆vt of the two transverse modes. Note that we expect
the ∆vt of the two modes to also manifest itself as two different f FSR values for
the two modes, but the difference in f FSR of the two modes is too small to be
experimentally visible in our experiments. Hence, we require high-overtone BAW
resonances with modes numbers n ≃ 1000 to resolve the small velocity difference
of the two transverse modes of ∆vt ≈ 0.44 m/s observed here. From Fig. 7.1(b),
we find that for sapphire vft is equal to vst for elastic modes propagation along the
c-axis. Hence the observed frequency-splitting of the transverse modes requires a
small miscut angle θm between the propagation direction z and the c-axis of the
sapphire crystal. Using the calculated velocity splitting of the transverse modes,
we can respectively relate the observed velocity splitting ∆vt ≈ 0.44 m/s to an
estimated miscut angle of θ ≈ 0.017◦ for the first CoFe/Al2O3 sample in panel
(a) and ∆vt ≈ 1.1 m/s to an estimated miscut angle of θ ≈ 0.037◦ for the second
hybrid sample in panel (b). Here, we neglect the ϕ-dependence, which is valid for
small θ. The calculated θ-values of both samples are compatible with the suppliers
miscut specifications of the sapphire substrate of θm < 0.1◦ (a) and θm < 0.2◦ (b).
To verify these misalignment angle values for the specific samples, we performed high-resolution x-ray diffraction experiments on the CoFe/Al2O3 sample
with a miscut specification of θm < 0.1◦ . Specifically, we first utilize the total

138

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

reflection at grazing incidence and a sample tilt stage to align the sample surface
before studying the change of the angle of incidence θXRD of the (0006)-reflection
of the Al2O3 substrate originating from the finite miscut denoted as θm as function
of the polar angle ϕXRD 8 [see Fig. 7.5(a) for the measurement geometry. Note, that
in contrast to previous chapters, we here have used a high-resolution XRD setup,
that operates in the θ-θ geometry with stationary goniometer and sample instead
of the θ-2θ geometry with stationary X-ray tube.]. The resulting tuning of the
(0006)-reflection of the substrate as function of ϕXRD is plotted in Fig. 7.5(b).
(a)

(b)

Intensity (arb. unit)

360

θXRD

-K
α1 :
λ

sample

φXRD

or

ect

det

θXRD
χXRD

6000

270

y

XRD (°)

Cu

z

x

2

180

4000

m

2000

90
0
20.80

20.82

20.84

20.86

20.88

XRD (°)

Fig. 7.5. – (a) Measurement geometry used for the XRD experiments using a θ-θ X-ray
diffractometer with Cu-Kα1 radiation. Prior to the measurements, the azimuthal rotation
axis is aligned parallel to the surface normal of the sample. To determine the miscut
angle, rocking curves around the Al2O3 (0006) substrate reflection at different azimuthal
angles have been performed. (b) Colormap for the X-ray intensity of the (0006)-reflection
of the Al2O3 substrate for the CoFe on a c-axis Al2O3 (∆θ < 0.1◦ ) substrate as function of
ϕXRD and θXRD . The deviation of (0006)-reflection from a constant θXRD is attributed to
the sample miscut θm . We find θm = (0.011 ± 0.002)◦ (see blue dashed lines), which is in
excellent agreement with the θm = 0.017◦ determined via our FMR experiments.

We observe a tuning of the (0006)-reflection of ≈ 0.022◦ , which corresponds
to a miscut angle of θm of (0.011 ± 0.002)◦ , which is in good agreement with
the calculated value θ = 0.017◦ for this sample determined via the frequency
splitting of the two transverse modes and the related velocity splitting following
the Christoffel equation.
As a next step, we demonstrate that these observations are not unique to
CoFe on hexagonal Al2O3. To this end, we deposit 30 nm thick CoFe films on
both sides polished cubic GGG and Si substrates. Fig. 7.6 shows the fitted FMR
linewidth ∆H ( f ) at these samples recorded at T = 5 K as a function of f around
f 0 = 18 GHz. We choose to study the MEC coupling features by plotting ∆H ( f )
instead of from the raw colormap data for |S21 ( Hext , f )| due to its enhanced
sensitivity at low signal magnitudes.
8 Here, we use the subscript ”XRD” for the XRD-setup angles to avoid confusion with the sample

geometry angles introduced in Fig. 7.1(a).

7.1 Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in CoFe/sapphire

139

µ 0 ∆H ( m T )
µ 0 ∆H ( m T )

(a )

G G G

(b )

S i

fF S R

6
4
6

f0 = 1 8 G H z

4
-1 0

0

1 0

(f-f0 ) (M H z )

Fig. 7.6. – Fitted FMR linewidth ∆H ( f ) recorded at T = 5 K as a function of f around
f 0 =18 GHz for CoFe deposited on various substrate materials. Pronounced MEC peaks
are observed for CoFe deposited on (a) a 380 µm thick GGG (111) substrate (θm < 1.0◦ )
and (b) a 675 µm thick Si (100) substrate (θm < 0.5◦ ). Gray dashed lines indicate the free
spectral range f FSR of the BAW resonances in the individual substrates.

We find that the MEC double peak features in ∆H ( f ) are not unique to hexagonal Al2O3 substrates [see Fig. 7.2(d)] but are also observed for CoFe grown on (a)
380 µm thick (111)-oriented cubic GGG- and (b) on 675 µm thick (100) oriented cubic Si substrates. Note that we nominally expect the two transverse phonon modes
to be degenerate for the crystal directions of these two substrates [see Fig. 7.1(e)].
Hence, we again require a small miscut angle θm in these cubic substrate to give
rise to a detectable splitting in the phonon modes [see Fig. 7.1(f)]. In Fig. 7.6, the
splitting ∆ f and the free spectral range f FSR of the overtone resonances differ for
the various substrates, as the absolute values of vst and vft are different for these
various material systems. Furthermore, we find that the magnitude of both the
off- and on-resonant FMR linewidth is comparable for all substrates. This finding
suggests that (i) the magnetization damping and thus the magnetic properties
of the CoFe film remain unchanged for the various used substrates, (ii) that the
elastic relaxation rates of the used substrates are similarly low, and (iii) that the
underlying phonon excitation mechanism is governed by the material parameters
of CoFe [157, 436].
As a last step, we verify the linear frequency-splitting of the transverse phonon
modes for all of the used substrate materials by plotting the observed ∆ f ( f ) of
the MEC features recorded at T = 5 K as function of f for CoFe deposited on the
individual substrate materials in Fig. 7.7. The observed behavior in ∆ f ( f ) can be
well fitted with a linear function without a y-axis intercept following Eq. (7.1). As
a general trend, the slope of the fits in Fig. 7.7 is larger for substrate materials with
a larger margin of miscut angle θm and larger transverse velocities vt [77, 479] in
agreement with our expectations.
To briefly summarize the results of this section, we investigate the magnetoelastic coupling between the ferromagnetic resonance mode in a ferromagnetic
metallic CoFe thin film and the transverse acoustic phonon modes of high-overtone

140

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

A l2 O
3

( θm < 0 . 2 °)

( θm < 1 . 0 °)

G G G

∆f ( M H z )

4
A l2 O
3

( θm < 0 . 1 °)

2
S i ( θm < 0 . 5 °)
0
0

2 0

4 0
f (G H z )

Fig. 7.7. – Frequency splitting ∆ f ( f ) of the MEC double peak features recorded at T = 5 K
as function of f around f 0 =18 GHz for CoFe deposited on various substrate materials. A
linear evolution as function of f following Eq. (7.1) is confirmed for all substrate materials
studied in this work.

bulk acoustic resonators made from crystalline Al2O3, Si, and GGG substrates as
phononic host materials. As the chirality of the ferromagnetic resonance modes
excites circularly polarized elastic shear waves in the substrates, this excitation
scheme is of interest for the investigation of phononic angular momentum transport. However, the two transverse shear wave velocities can also differ depending
on the crystallographic symmetry and the phonon propagation direction with
respect to the crystal axes. As a small miscut angle θm between crystallographic
axis and propagation direction is commonly observed for commercially available
substrate materials, we find twofold MEC features in our experiments, which can
be mapped velocity differences in the m/s range of the two transverse phonon
modes and the corresponding substrate miscut angle is experimentally corroborated by XRD experiments. Thus these substrates can be considered as birefringent
for phonons [470]. However, we note that cryogenic temperatures and the corresponding strongly reduced acoustic loss rates ηa are a basic requirement to resolve
the splitting of the two transverse BAW modes. The temperature dependence of
this birefringence effect will be discussed in detail in the following section.

7.2 Temperature dependence of
magnon-phonon-polarons in a ferromagnetic metal
with low Gilbert damping
In section 7.1, we have stated the importance of cryogenic environments for
the detection of phononic birefringence in the host crystal arising from a small
but finite miscut introduced in its formatting process, as at low temperatures
the elastic loss rates are reduced and the two phonon modes can be resolved
as high overtone modes of the BAW resonator in the GHz regime. Hence room
temperature measurements in Refs. [77, 158, 159] were not able to detect this effect.

7.2 Temperature dependence of magnon-phonon-polarons

141

Furthermore, the used YIG on GGG BAW resonator material combination has
significant drawbacks at cryogenic temperatures due to an enhanced magnetization damping of YIG [140, 142] and high microwave losses in GGG [482, 483].
Consequently, the implementation of MEC using CoFe grown on arbitrary crystalline substrates has advantages in this regard to benefit from the reduced acoustic
losses [471,472] combined with the increased magnetoelastic coupling [473], which
result in improved cooperativities C at cryogenic temperatures. This motivates us
to explore both the frequency- and temperature dependence of the acoustic and
magnetic damping properties ηa and κs as well the magneto-elastic coupling rate
geff of the CoFe grown on c-axis Al2O3 bilayer system from Sec. 7. We find, that the
results for both κs and ηa can be well understood in terms of the models of Gilbert
damping in 3d metals [119, 484] and Landau-Rumer theory [471, 472], respectively.
Furthermore, by investigating the frequency- and temperature dependence of the
magnetoelastic coupling rate geff and cooperativity C, we are able to identify optimal operation conditions of our hybrid devices for mode hybridization. Finally,
we also assess the potential of the phononic signatures in the FMR for strain and
stress sensing applications.

7.2.1 temperature dependence of the raw |S21 |-data spectra
The frequency-dependence of the raw |S21 |-spectra of the CoFe/Al2O3 hybrid sample at cryogenic temperatures has already been briefly discussed in the
interpretation of Fig. 7.4(a), where we clearly observe phononic resonances up
to f 0 = 30 GHz at T = 5 K, which indicate the low elastic damping at cryogenic
temperatures. Regarding the temperature dependence, its strong impact on the
magnetoelastic coupling in our hybrid sample is immediately evident from the
temperature dependence raw data transmission spectra |S21 | recorded as function
of external magnetic field Hext around Hres ( T ) and f in a range of 20 MHz around
a center frequency of f 0 = 18 GHz, which are plotted in Fig. 7.8 for low (T = 5 K,
l = 1), intermediate (T = 100 K, l = 2) and elevated temperatures (T = 300 K,
l = 3). The resonance field Hres and plotted |S21 |-range of the sub-panels are
listed in Tab. 7.2.
Superimposed on the Kittel mode in dark brown color, we observe the
distinct frequency periodic pattern of the two phononic resonances induced by
the two transverse elastic modes for both low and intermediate temperatures. As
previously discussed in Sec. 7.1,the observed f FSR ≈ 6.04 MHz agrees well with
the expectation for a standing elastic wave pattern in a bulk acoustic resonator via
Eq.(2.50). Furthermore, the detection of two neighboring phonon resonances with
a frequency splitting of ∆ f ≈ 1.40 MHz is attributed to the non-degeneracy of
the velocities of the fast and slow transverse modes vft and vst due to a small but
finite angle between the c-axis of sapphire and the propagation direction of the
shear waves which is parallel to the surface normal z (see Sec. 7.1). Comparing

142

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

m a x ( |S 2l1 )
1 0

f-f0 (M H z )

0 .0 1 8 3 6

0 .0 1 8 1 6

0 .0 1 7 9 7

m in ( |S 2l1 |)

|S 2 1 |

0 .0 1 7 7 7

0 .0 1 7 5 7

0 .0 1 7 3 8

0 .0 1 7 1 8

0 .0 1 6 9 8

0 .0 1 6 7 8

0 .0 1 6 5 9

0 .0 1 6 3 9

0 .0 1 6 1 9

0 .0 1 6 0 0

0 .0 1 5 8 0

0 .0 1 5 6 0

0 .0 1 5 4 1

0 .0 1 5 2 1

0 .0 1 5 0 1

0 .0 1 4 8 1

0 .0 1 4 6 2

l= 1

l= 2

l= 3

5 K

1 0 0 K

3 0 0 K

0 .0 1 4 4 2

-1 0

0

f0= 1 8 G H z
-5

0

5

-5
µ 0(H

0
e x t- H

5
l)

-5

0

5

(m T )

Fig. 7.8. – |S21 | recorded at varying temperatures and plotted as a function of frequency
f and external magnetic field Hext in the range of Hres for f 0 = 18 GHz. The Hres and
|S21 |-range of the individual panels are listed in Tab. 7.2. The phononic double peak
features are apparent for low (T = 5 K, l = 1) and intermediate temperature (T = 100 K,
l = 2) but vanish at elevated temperatures (T = 300 K, l = 3).

panels l = 1 and l = 2, we find, that for elevated temperatures the phonon
resonances decrease in frequency due to the thermal expansion of the sample and
also become less pronounced due to the increased elastic damping, which results
in a broadening of the phononic resonances. Consequently, at T = 300 K (l = 3),
the interaction between magnons and the bulk acoustic resonator modes is no
longer directly visible in the raw |S21 |-spectra and we therefore need to process
the raw data to visualize the weak and smeared out coupling features at elevated
temperatures.
l
T (K)
µ0 Hres (T)
l |) (10−3 )
min(|S21
l |) (10−3 )
max(|S21

1
5
3.01
16
25

2
100
3.00
14
21

3
300
2.94
14
18

Tab. 7.2. – Plot parameters of Fig. 7.8. Temperature T, resonance field µ0 Hres as well as
l |) and max(| Sl |) for l ∈ [1, 3], l ∈ N.
minimum and maximum S21 -parameter min(|S21
21

7.2.2 Frequency and temperature dependence of the
magnetic and elastic relaxation rate
As previously done in the data analysis procedure of Fig. 7.2, we analyze the
magnonic and phononic relaxation rates as function of T and f by fitting the fixed
frequency S21 ( Hext )|-cuts, which are off-resonant with the phononic modes and
fixed |S21 ( f )|-cuts for fixed Hext , which are detuned from the Kittel mode with
Lorentzian functions. The resulting half-width at half maximum of these fits are

7.2 Temperature dependence of magnon-phonon-polarons

143

the magnetic and elastic relaxation rates κs and ηa , respectively. In Fig. 7.9(a) and
(b), we plot κs and the ηa,i as function of microwave driving frequency f .
2 0 0

π) ( M H z )

(b )

∆f / 2
h a ,1

0 .5

h a ,2

a / ( 2

1 0 0

0

h

k

s / ( 2

π) ( M H z )

(a )

T 0= 5 K
0

2 0

4 0

0 .0

T 0= 5 K
0

2 0

4 0

f (G H z )

f (G H z )

Fig. 7.9. – Relaxation rates of the magnetic (a) and elastic (b) subsystems of the CoFe on
Al2O3 hybrid sample at T0 = 5 K as a function of frequency f . Continuous lines represent
fits to the data with a linear (a) or quadratic (b) frequency dependence for the magnetic
and elastic subsystems, respectively. The green dashed line indicates half of the frequency
splitting of the two transverse elastic modes ∆ f /2 as a measure for the mode overlap of
the two transverse elastic modes.

For the magnetic relaxation rate κs in panel (a), we observe a linear dispersion
in the magnetic relaxation rate κs ( f ) induced by the expected viscous Gilbert
damping in the LLG [see Eq- (2.15)]. We fit the raw data to the expression
κs /(2π) = κs0 /(2π) + 2α f , where κs0 is the inhomogeneous linewidth of the FMR
at f = 0 Hz and α is the Gilbert damping parameter, and obtain κs0 /(2π) =
(48.0 ± 2.4) MHz and a low α = (2.9 ± 0.1) · 10−3 comparable to the RT-values
for CoFe in Refs. [135, 389]. This result demonstrates the temperature-robust low
magnetic damping of CoFe. In the Appendix G1.1, we verify the roughly constant
α of our CoFe thin film. The elastic damping of the two transverse modes ηa,i
in panel (b), we observe a non-linear increase with rising f . In analogy to the
room-temperature attenuation of elastic modes in GGG in Ref. [159, 160], we fit
the ηa,i ( f ) with a quadratic expression of the form
ηa ( f ) = ηa0 + 4π2 ξ f 2 ,

(7.2)

0 / (2π) = (43 ± 17) kHz, (41 ± 18) kHz and
yielding the fit parameters ηa1,2
ξ 1,2 /(2π) = (1.3 ± 0.1) · 10−8 /GHz, (1.2 ± 0.1) · 10−8 /GHz, which are one order
of magnitude lower to those for GGG in Refs. [159, 160] at room temperature.
0 and ξ compared to literature are attributed to both the
The greatly reduced ηa,i
i
excellent acoustic properties of Al2O3 and the strongly reduced elastic damping at
5 K compared to RT. The quadratic dependence of ηa ( f ) can be naively attributed
to phonon-phonon-scattering as the phonon density of states scales ∝ f 2 for
h f /kB T < 1, where h is the Planck constant and kB is the Boltzmann constant. To
obtain an estimate of up to which frequencies we are able to detect the standing
waves in our samples, we compare the acoustic decay length to the acoustic wave

144

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

propagation distance given by the substrate thickness L. Here, we naively expect
to be able to detect standing waves if δ1,2 = 2πvt /ηa1,2 ( f ) > 2L, i.e. the acoustic
wave amplitude is reduced by less than 1/e of its initial value after transmitting the
substrate twice and interfering with the injected acoustic wave to form a standing
wave mode. Using Eq. (7.2) together with our fitting parameters from Fig. 7.2(b),
we find that this criterion is met for frequencies up to f ≃ 50 GHz. Hence,
in agreement with our experimental observations, we expect the formation of
standing waves in our sapphire substrate throughout the experimentally available
frequency range.
The fitted elastic damping in Fig. 7.9(b) translates to a quality factor of our
bulk elastic modes of approximately Q ≃ (20 − 25) · 103 at f = 1 GHz, which is
comparable in magnitude to those of high overtone bulk acoustic resonators in
Refs. [485, 486] demonstrating the expected good acoustic properties of the used
Al2O3 substrates. Notably, the quadratic dependence of ηa with f can also be
viewed as an asset as the generation of chiral phonons requires the controlled
excitation of both orthogonal shear waves, which requires that their modes overlap in frequency. As the mode spacing of the two transverse modes ∆ f scales
linear in f [see green dashed line in Fig. 7.2(b)], whereas their mode linewidth
increases proportional to f 2 , the degree of mode overlap (relation between mode
splitting ∆ f and the mode linewidths ηa,i , mode coupling for ∆ f /2 > ηa,1,2 ) can
be controlled by appropriately choosing the microwave frequency. In particular,
for the investigated sample a frequency overlap of the modes can be achieved at
T = 5 K for f < 0.8 GHz in the investigated frequency range (note that due to the
quadratic dependence of ηa , the mode overlap of the two transverse elastic modes
is restored for frequencies above the investigated frequency range). Similarly, the
tuning of ηa with temperature can also be explored for this purpose as will be
discussed in the interpretation of Fig. 7.10(b).
Having discussed the evolution of the elastic and magnetic relaxation rates
κs and ηa,i with microwave frequency at a fixed T = 5 K, we now discuss their
temperature dependence at fixed frequency. In Fig. 7.10, we plot κs and ηa,i as
function of temperature at fixed f 0 =18 GHz.
The magnetic relaxation rate in panel (a) is approximately constant up to T =
30 K followed by the formation of a minimum in κs at T = 100 K and a continuous
increase in damping for higher T. The regime 4 K < T < 100 K matches the
expected behavior of 3d transition metals such as for example Permalloy in our
previous studies [69, 137] and theoretical predictions [117]. However, the increase
of κs for higher T is too substantial in magnitude to be explained solely with an
increased damping from magnon-magnon scattering at elevated temperatures
[484]. The likeness of the strong increase in κs at elevated Ts in panel (a) with
the evolution of the ηa,i in panel (b) indicates, that the increasing linewidth of
the phonon modes results in a more effective phonon pumping contribution
to the magnetization damping [112, 157]. This increase in phonon pumping

7.2 Temperature dependence of magnon-phonon-polarons

145

(a )

(b )
/ ( 2 π) ( M H z )

1 .0

∆f / 2
h a ,1

h a ,2

h a

7 5

k s

/ ( 2 π) ( M H z )

1 0 0

5 0

ff0 = 1 8 G H z
1 0

1 0 0

0 .1

ff0 = 1 8 G H z
1 0

1 0 0
T (K )

T (K )

Fig. 7.10. – Relaxation rates of the magnetic (a) and elastic (b) subsystems of the CoFe
on Al2O3 hybrid sample at f 0 = 5 K as a function of temperature T. The continuous
lines in panel (b) represent fits to Eq. (7.3) and the green dashed line indicates half of the
frequency splitting of the two transverse elastic modes ∆ f /2 as a measure for the mode
overlap of these two modes.

also manifests itself as an increased inhomogeneous linewidth Hinh at elevated
temperatures in bbFMR experiments in the Appendix G1.1.
For the elastic relaxation rates of the two transverse phononic modes in
Fig. 7.10(b), we observe nearly constant ηa,i from 300 K down to T ≈ 180 K. Notably,
the formation of standing acoustic waves can also be weakly detected in |S21 ( f )|
spectra at elevated temperatures up to 300 K at f 0 = 18 GHz as the acoustic decay
length remains comparable to 2L [δ1,2 ( T = 300 K) ≈ 0.6 cm/1.0 cm ≃ 2L]. For
lower temperatures, the ηa,i decrease strongly down to T = 80 K and remain
roughly constant for lower T. The temperature dependence of the transverse
acoustic modes in sapphire in the low temperature regime is governed by the
Landau-Rumer mechanism [472] as experimentally observed in Ref. [471]. In this
model, the acoustic wave is regarded as a parallel beam of low-energy phonons.
Because of a finite anharmonicity of the crystal, interactions between different
modes are possible. The rate at which the acoustic phonons are scattered can
be calculated within perturbation theory. This model predicts a temperature
dependence of the acoustic relaxation rate of the form [471]
0
ηa,i ( T ) = ηa,i
+ β a,i T 4 .

(7.3)

A fit of Eq. (7.3) to our low temperature data for T ≤ 180 K yields the
0 / (2π) = (0.22 ± 0.02) MHz, (0.16 ± 0.01) MHz and β / (2π) =
parameters ηa1,2
1,2
(0.97 ± 0.03) · 10−3 Hz/K4 , (2.28 ± 0.16) · 10−3 Hz/K4 , which are in rough agreement with the values in Ref. [471] as discussed in detail in the Appendix G3. For
temperatures T > 150 K, all the phonon modes involved in the Landau-Rumer
scattering process are excited and hence we observe a roughly constant ηa [487].
The strongly increased ηa at elevated temperatures translates to a stronger mode
overlap of the two transverse elastic modes, which are split in frequency by ∆ f and
thus the more efficient generation of helical phonons at elevated temperatures. To

146

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

indicate the degree of mode overlap, we added the green dashed line corresponding to ∆ f /2 in Fig. 7.10(b). When the individual ηa,i of the two transverse elastic
modes exceed ∆ f /2, the two modes overlap. Thus, from Fig. 7.10(b) we expect
the generation of helical phonons for temperatures T > 150 K at f 0 = 18 GHz.
The strong tuning of the ηa,i with both frequency and temperature underlines
the potential for controlling the helicity of the phonons by engineering the crystalline orientation with respect to the phonon propagation direction for suitable
working points in f and T. However, here we have to account for the magnetoelastic coupling rate between magnons and phonons, which itself is also strongly
frequency-dependent [159, 160] and expectedly to a lower degree also temperature
dependent due to the expected reduction of magnetoelastic coupling constant
B [473]. Hence, in the following section, we study the effective coupling rates geff
and cooperativities C of the two phononic modes as function of both frequency
and temperature.

7.2.3 Frequency- and temperature dependence of the
effective coupling rate and cooperativity
To extract the effective magnetoelastic coupling rate, we use Eq. (2.56) in
combination with the extracted elastic relaxation rates ηa,i and modification of the
FMR-linewidth for frequencies, which are in resonance with the BAW phonon
modes ∆HMEC [see Fig. 7.2(b) and (d)]. The resulting geff as function of f at
T0 = 5 K is plotted in Fig. 7.11(a).
We observe in Fig. 7.11(a) a continuous increase in geff with rising f , which is
fitted using [77]
s
geff (ω ) = B




2gµB
d
1 − cos 2π f
,
h f Ms ρ̃t dL
ṽt

(7.4)

where h is the Planck constant and ρ̃t is the volume density of the CoFe layer.
Using Ms = Meff = 1.90 · 106 A/m, g = 2.079 (see Appendix Sec. G1), L =
510 µm, d = 30 nm, the transverse velocity ṽt = 3170 m/s and the volume density
ρ̃t = 8110 kg/m3 for CoFe [436], we extract a fitted magnetoelastic constant
B1,2 = (13.5 ± 0.6) · 106 J/m3 , (12.3 ± 0.8) · 106 J/m3 for the two modes [continuous
lines in Fig. 7.11(a)]. To compare our experimentally extracted B with literature
values, we use the following definition for the magnetoelastic constant B in
polycrystalline thin films [488]
B=

3 E
λs
21+ν

(7.5)

where E is the Young’s modulus, ν is the Poisson ratio and λs is the saturation
magnetostriction. We insert E = 220 GPa [489], v = 0.29 (Sputtering target
Fe
−5 [488] in
manufacturer’s specification) and λs = 0.25λCo
s + 0.75λs ≈ 6.1 · 10

7.2 Temperature dependence of magnon-phonon-polarons

147

(a )

(c )

g e f f / ( 2 π) ( M H z )

g e ff2
5

g e ff1

T 0= 5 K

fC m a x= 1 8 G H z

0
(b )

(d )

1
C
C

2

C
0

1

0

T 0= 5 K
2 0
f (G H z )

4 0

0

fC m a x= 1 8 G H z
1 0 0

2 0 0

3 0 0

T (K )

Fig. 7.11. – Left column: Magnetoelastic coupling geff (a) and cooperativity C (b) at
T0 = 5 K as function of f . Right column: Temperature dependence of geff (c) and C (d) at
f Cmax = 18 GHz as function of T. Continuous lines in panels (a) and (b) represent fitting
2 / (2η κ ) using the fitting results of Fig. 7.2.
curves to Eqs. (7.4) and C = geff
a,i s

Eq. (7.5) and obtain B = 15.7 · 106 J/m3 , which is in good agreement with our
fitted B1,2 -values from Fig. 7.11(a).
From a comparison of the κs ( f ) in Fig. 7.9(a), ηa,i ( f ) in Fig. 7.9(b) and the effective coupling rate geff ( f ) in Fig. 7.11(a), we find we are operating the CoFe/Al2O3
sample in a regime analogous to the Purcell enhanced regime (ηa,i < geff < κs )
throughout the experimentally investigated frequency range (5 GHz ≤ f ≤
50 GHz) at T0 = 5 K [149]. In Fig. 7.11(b), we plot the calculated cooperativity of
2 / (2κ η
our coupled system C1,2 = geff
s a1,2 ) as function of f . Here, the continuous
lines represent the calculated C from our fitted ηa,i using Eq. (7.2), geff using
Eq. (7.4) as well as the linear fit for κs from Fig. 7.9(a). Note that the maximum
of the cooperativity is at approximately f Cmax = 18 GHz and does not coincide
with a maximum in geff from Eq. (7.4) due to the frequency dependence of the
magnetic and elastic relaxation rates (see also Ref. [77]). We find a good agreement
between theory curve and experimental data for f > 15 GHz, but do not observe
the predicted reduction in C for lower frequencies. We attribute this disparity
to the unexpectedly large geff at low f in Fig. 7.11(a). In Fig. 7.11(c), we plot the
temperature dependence of geff at f Cmax = 18 GHz. We observe a slight increase
with rising T resulting in a peak at 150 K for mode 1 and at 110 K for mode 2.
We attribute this peak in geff to the tuning of the acoustic properties of the CoFe
thin film and sapphire substrate Al2O3, which at the peak temperature minimizes
√
the interfacial acoustic impedance mismatch (Z = ρvt ) and thereby allows for

148

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

the more efficient injection of phonons for ZCoFe = ZAl2O3 [157]. The observed
reduction in geff ( T ) for higher temperatures in panel (c) is in agreement with the
expected reduction of B for 3d transition metals at elevated T [473]. Comparing
the evolution of geff ( T ) in Fig. 7.11(c) with that of ηa in Fig. 7.10(b), we find Purcell
enhanced coupling geff > ηa for T < 130 K for mode 1 and for T < 160 K for
mode 2 and weak coupling for higher temperatures. Regarding the temperature
dependence of the cooperativity in Fig. 7.11(d), we observe a peak at around 60 K
from the reduced κs in this temperature-range as apparent in Fig. 7.10(a). At
higher temperatures, the strong decrease in C mirrors the increase in the ηa,i in
Fig. 7.10(b) for this temperature range.

7.2.4 Study of the tuning of the phononic resonances for
sensing applications
µ 0 ∆H
1 .5

1 0

M E C

1 .0

(m T )
0 .5

0 .0

(a )

f-f0 (M H z )

5
0

n 0 + ∆n

n 0

-5
fC m a x= 1 8 G H z

-1 0
(b )

fF S R (M H z )

6 .0 5

6 .0 0

5 .9 5

1 0 0

2 0 0

3 0 0

T (K )

Fig. 7.12. – (a) Modulation of the FMR linewidth due to magnetoelastic coupling ∆HMEC
as function of T around f Cmax = 18 GHz. White arrows indicate the acoustic modes n0 ,
which are visible at around 18 GHz at T =5 K and the mode n0 + ∆n at around 18 GHz
at RT. Light blue arrows indicate the unexpected third visible periodic feature, which is
currently still the subject of active research. (b) Free spectral range f FSR as function of T.
The red continuous line represents a theory model for the temperature dependence of
f FSR ( T ) using Eq. (7.6).

Finally, having mapped out the relaxation rates of both the magnetic and
elastic subsystems as well as the effective magnetoelastic coupling rate as function
of both frequency and temperature, in a last step, we investigate the tuning of the

7.2 Temperature dependence of magnon-phonon-polarons

149

BAW resonances with temperature. As for elevated temperatures, the phononic
features are not directly visible in the raw |S21 |-data (see Fig. 7.8), we instead
investigate the modulation of the FMR-linewidth ∆HMEC in resonance with the
acoustic BAW modes, which is visible up to room-temperature and can hence
serve as a very sensitive tool to probe MEC even at large κs and ηa . To this end,
we plot in Fig. 7.12(a) the FMR linewidth change ∆HMEC around f Cmax = 18 GHz
as function of temperature and frequency f − f Cmax .
We observe in Fig. 7.12(a), that the two peaks in FMR-linewidth, induced
by the coupling of the Kittel mode with the two transverse acoustic modes,
broaden and overlap for increasing temperatures. Additionally, they shift to
lower frequencies with the mode number of the phononic resonance increasing
by ∆n = 35 from T = 5 K to T = 295 K. Below the two prominent MEC features,
which can be directly assigned to the two transverse acoustic modes, a weak
frequency periodic feature with a negative ∆HMEC can be identified for cryogenic
temperatures. We attribute this feature to the coupling of the Kittel mode to
standing waves in the substrate of an unexpected additional phononic branch
with slightly altered propagation velocity to the two transverse phonon modes.
The origin of this additional mode is currently still the subject of active research.
Note that owing to our excitation scheme, we cannot excite longitudinal
modes in the linear regime, which would furthermore also exhibit a significantly
larger group velocity and thereby also a different free spectral range [471]. From
the evolution of the MEC features of ∆H − ∆H0 in Fig. 7.12(a), we can extract
the free spectral range f FSR ( T ), which is plotted in Fig. 7.12(b). This allows us to
compare its tuning in temperature with a naive model via [157]
f FSR = 1/[2(d/ṽt + L( T )/vt ( T ))].

(7.6)

Here, L( T ) and vt ( T ) are governed by the thermal expansion coefficient α∗ ( T )
p
[490] and the shear modulus G ( T ) [478] of Al2O3 via vt ( T ) = ( G ( T )/ρ( T )).
As the thickness of the FM layer (d ≈ 30 nm) is thin compared to that of the
substrate (L ≈ 510 µm), we expect that the temperature dependence of the acoustic
properties of the magnetic film can be neglected in Eq. (7.6). The expected behavior
for f FSR ( T ) is plotted as a solid line in Fig. 7.12(b).
We observe a good agreement of our theory curve with the experimentally
measured f FSR , thus proving its validity. Hence, the monitoring of f FSR as
function of an external control parameter can serve as a sensitive tool to monitor
the tuning of both shear modulus G and sample thickness L. Notably, we are able
to resolve changes in f FSR down to the kHz-range, which via Eq. (7.6) and using
the parameters L ≃ 510 µm and v ≃ 6.1 km/s translates to a relative change in
substrate thickness of ∆L/L ≈ 1.7 · 10−4 , which is comparable with the sensitivity
of state-of the art high precision strain sensors [491, 492].

150

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

7.3 Summary and Outlook
To summarize the results presented in this chapter, we have investigated the
magnetoelastic coupling between the Kittel mode in a ferromagnetic metal and
the transverse acoustic phonon modes of various high-overtone bulk acoustic
wave resonators by performing cryogenic bbFMR(see Sec. 3.3.1). Using thin
polycrystalline ferromagnetic CoFe films to drive the acoustic excitations, we
have explored Al2O3, Si, and GGG as host materials for phononic excitations. As
the chirality of the ferromagnetic resonance mode can excite circularly polarized
elastic shear waves carrying angular momentum in the substrate materials, this
excitation scheme is suitable for the investigation of phononic angular momentum
transport. Notably, the two transverse shear wave velocities can differ depending
on the crystallographic symmetry and the phonon propagation direction with
respect to the crystal axis, which we experimentally detect in our experiments for
all of the investigated substrate materials as the manifestation of two frequencyperiodic magnetoelastic coupling features at a frequency splitting ∆ f that linearly
scales with f and can be translated to velocity differences of the two transverse
modes in the m/s range. We attribute these features to a small miscut angle in
the host crystals induced during the growth process. As a consequence, the BAW
host substrate materials can be considered as birefringent for phonons [470]. The
combination of an experimentally simple but efficient ferromagnetic excitation
scheme using ferromagnetic resonance with crystalline substrates hosting longlived phonons thus allows for the realization of phononic λ/4-plates [470], to
convert linear into circularly polarized phonons and vice-versa via phononic
birefringence [493].
In a following step, we study the CoFe grown on crystalline sapphire hybrid sample in greater detail by performing by investigating the frequency- and
temperature dependence of both the magnetic- and elastic loss rates κs and ηa
as well as of its effective magnetoelastic coupling rate geff and cooperativity C to
identify optimal working points for the realization of magnetoelastic devices. In
particular the strong increase in the elastic loss rates ηa for rising T demonstrate
the advantage of performing these experiments at cryogenic temperatures to push
magnon-phonon hybrids to stronger coupling regimes such as the high cooperativity Purcell-enhanced regime [149]. From a different perspective, the strongly
increasing ηa at elevated temperatures give rise to a substantial mode overlap of
the two transverse elastic waves allowing for the injection of circularly polarized
phonons. Hence in particular the sample temperature can be viewed as a control
knob for the controlled pumping of either circular or linear phonons. Regarding
the magnetic loss rate, we find a relatively temperature-robust Gilbert damping,
which renders the CoFe/Al2O3 material platform superior to the conventionally
used YIG on GGG substrate [77, 158–160] hybrid devices regarding their performance at cryogenic temperatures. Furthermore, the usage of CoFe allows the free

7.3 Summary and Outlook

151

choice of substrate material and its integration into more complex device layouts.
Finally, the study of the tuning of the free spectral range f FSR as function of
temperature allows to study the thermal expansion coefficient and shear modulus
with high sensitivity. A high sensitivity to relative changes in substrate thickness
of the order of ∆L/L ≃ 10−4 of this CoFe/Al2O3 hybrid sample are of interest for
the realization of magnetic micro-actuators and systems (MAGMAS) [494–497].

152

Chapter 7

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films

Summary and Outlook

8

In this thesis, we have investigated the magnetization dynamics of various magnetic thin films coupled to other systems. The resulting hybrid systems are of
interest for the control and manipulation of the magnetization dynamics in the
magnetic thin films. By coupling the magnetization dynamics to different elementary excitations of the solid-state system, various hybrid modes are generated,
which allow to unlock novel functionalities of the hybrid system. The overarching
goal is to harness the spin degree of freedom for information processing. In particular, collective excitations of the spin system such as spin waves are promising
for the realization of more versatile and energy efficient logic circuits. The results
presented in this thesis have been obtained using different magnetic materials
and coupling the excitation of their spin system to a variety of other solid-state
excitations. In detail, we have studied:
• (i) the magnetization dynamics in γ-Fe2O3 thin films and how magnetization
damping is affected by the presence of paramagnetic impurities in these
films in Chapter 4.
• (ii) the change of magnetization dynamics of permalloy thin films by the spin
torques generated in adjacent superconducting NbN and high spin-orbit
interaction TaN layers in Chapter 5.
• (iii) the coupling of magnons in ultra-low damping ferromagnetic Co25Fe75
thin films to photons in magnetic field-robust Nb70Ti30N microwave resonators in Chapter 6
• (iv) the coupling of magnons in ferromagnetic Co25Fe75 thin films to transverse acoustic phonons in various single-crystalline substrate materials in
Chapter 7.
These hybrid systems have been characterized by performing either broadband
ferromagnetic resonance experiments at cryogenic temperatures or microwave
spectroscopy on superconducting resonators.
In the following, we provide a brief summary of the key experimental results
for each of the studied hybrid systems. We discuss the main findings and give an
outlook on the new questions and exciting prospects for further research triggered
by these findings.

153

8.1 Slowly relaxing impurities in maghemite thin
films
In Chapter 4, we characterize the epitaxial growth as well as static and
dynamic magnetic properties of the room-temperature ferrimagnetic insulator γFe2O3 (maghemite). Epitaxially strained maghemite thin films have been grown on
MgO substrates via pulsed laser deposition (PLD). The x-ray diffraction (HR-XRD)
scans confirm good crystalline quality and coherently strained growth of our thin
films, while the results of SQUID magnetometry reveal the presence of a sizable
density of antiphase boundaries in our γ-Fe2O3 thin films. By studying magnetization dynamics, we find a small negative effective magnetization Meff , providing
further evidence for a strain-induced perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in our
samples. Most importantly, we observe a non-linear evolution of the ferromagnetic
resonance linewidth as a function of the magnetization precession frequency. We
can attribute this dependence to the finite coupling of the magnetization dynamics
to paramagnetic Fe2+ impurities within the framework of a so-called slow relaxor
mechanism at cryogenic temperatures and a valence exchange model for elevated
temperatures.
The controlled tuning of the magnetization damping is of interest in the
research field of magnetization damping engineering of magnetic materials [82].
Moreover, it allows one to tailor the magnetic damping to the specific requirement of device applications, for example, to enhance the sensitivity of magnetic
sensors by increasing damping. Furthermore, the observed perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in γ-Fe2O3 is of interest for the realization of energy efficient
data storage devices using magnetic textures such as magnetic bubbles, chiral
domain walls, and magnetic skyrmions [212, 213]. Finally, the near-zero effective
magnetization of γ-Fe2O3 induced by perpendicular magnetic anisotropy renders
it an interesting material platform for magnonics applications using magnetically
ordered insulators [106, 199, 214, 215].

8.2 Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet
heterostructures
In Chapter 5, we study how the magnetization dynamics in ferromagnetic
materials is affected by spin torques generated in adjacent materials using superconductor/ferromagnet heterostructures. First, we investigate NbN/Ni80Fe20(Py)multilayers with and without a Pt spin sink layer by cryogenic bbFMR experiments
using a coplanar waveguide both as signal detector and microwave transducer.
By performing a phase sensitive detection of the transmission signal as a function of both temperature and frequency, we quantitatively extract the inductive
coupling between sample and coplanar waveguide. The experimental results can

154

Chapter 8

Summary and Outlook

be consistently interpreted in terms of inverse current-induced torques in our
heterostructures. In the superconducting state of NbN, we observe a negative
damping-like spin toque σd , which can be mapped to the quasiparticle mediated
inverse spin Hall effect [47]. Moreover, below Tc we find an unexpectedly large
field-like current-induced torque σf . To gain more insight into the underlying
physics, for comparison, we have optimized the growth of superconducting TaN
thin films on SiO2 substrates via reactive dc magnetron sputtering. We selected
this material due to its strong spin-orbit interaction, which is expected to translate into the generation of larger spin torques in superconductor/ferromagnet
heterostructures based on TaN. As a result of our growth optimization series, we
obtained a maximum superconducting transition temperature of Tc = 5 K and
a maximum critical field µ0 Hc2 = (13.8 ± 0.1) T, which are comparable to literature [338, 341, 356]. With the optimized samples, we have investigated the impact
of the strong spin-orbit interaction in TaN on the inductively detected spin torques
in TaN/Py heterostructures. In the superconducting state of TaN, we again detect
a negative damping-like spin torque attributed to the QMiSHE. Compared to
the results for NbN/Py bilayers a larger amplitude is found due to the stronger
spin-orbit interaction in TaN. Furthermore, we again observe the manifestation
of a large positive field-like spin torque of unknown origin matching our results
for NbN/Py-bilayers. The observed field-like σf in the superconducting state of
TaN/Py-bilayers was considerably smaller than for the NbN/Py-bilayers, what
indicates the crucial impact of the superconducting condensate density to σf . This
observation points to charge currents with a field-like symmetry generated directly
in the superconductor as proposed in Refs. [295, 362]. Future experiments are
required to identify the precise physical mechanism giving rise to the enhanced σf
in our heterostructures.
The experiments performed within this thesis allow one to investigate the
spin transport in superconductors from a different angle by incorporating the
inverse spin torque conductivities with existing methods, which solely rely on
the study of the magnetization damping [49, 50, 256, 285, 287]. In particular, the
damping-like σd in the superconducting state represents an alternative detection
technique for the study of the quasiparticle-mediated inverse spin Hall effect in
superconductors to the spin-current injection experiments performed in Ref. [47].
Furthermore, the observed large field-like spin torque σf provides clear evidence
for the presence of frequency-dependent charge currents in the superconducting
state apart from the Meißner screening currents. Notably, intrinsic charge currents
with field-like symmetry in superconductors in the presence of spin-orbit interaction have been theoretically proposed in Refs. [295, 362]. Future research aims to
exploit the sizable spin torques in the superconducting state to manipulate the
magnetization dynamics of the magnetic thin film of a superconductor/ferromagnet heterostructures via the application of a charge current. As an experimental
detection technique, we propose to perform the microfocused frequency-resolved

8.2 Spin torques in Superconductor/Ferromagnet heterostructures

155

magneto-optic Kerr effect (µFR-MOKE) technique outlined in Refs. [30, 365] on
micropatterned SC/FM-bilayer samples at cryogenic temperatures. Aside from
the study of how superconductivity impacts the the magnetization dynamics
in SC/FM-hybrids performed in this thesis, µFR-MOKE-experiments could in
principle also allow to probe the vice versa effect, i.e. how the magnetization
dynamics in the FM layer impacts superconductivity. Research in this direction is
motivated by recent theoretical works, which predict the formation of dynamical
supercurrents [498] and spin-triplets [499, 500] in the SC layer induced by magnetization dynamics in an adjacent FM layer. To enable the characterization of
the SC layer simultaneous to the magnetization dynamics in the FM layer, we
propose the addition of electric DC lines on the coplanar waveguide used in the
experimental µFRMOKE setup.

8.3 Magnon-Photon coupling in superconducting
microwave resonators/ferromagnetic
microstructure hybrids
In Chapter 6, we have studied the coupling of magnons in micropatterned
ferromagnetic strips to photons in superconducting microwave resonators. In
a first step, we have investigated the performance of compact lumped element
planar microwave resonators based on Nb70 Ti30 N (NbTiN) films grown on various
substrate materials. The resonators have been studied in external in-plane magnetic fields up to 440 mT, a broad temperature regime from 2.2 K up to 13 K, as
well as at mK temperatures. When operating the resonators in the multi-photon
regime at T = 2.2 K, we find internal quality factors Qint ≃ 2 · 105 for NbTiN
resonators grown on pristine Si substrates. Regarding their robustness to elevated
temperatures and fields, we find a Qint > 105 for T ≤ 4.8 K and µ0 Hext ≤ 180 mT.
These values are comparable to those reported recently for NbN resonators [425]
and greatly exceed the performance of elementary Nb [382, 415, 424]. In addition,
we have investigated the Q-factors of the resonators on pristine Si substrates at
millikelvin temperatures to asses their applicability for quantum applications. Operating at T = 7 mK and µ0 Hext = 0 mT in a dilution refrigerator with appropriate
magnetic field and radiation shielding, we extract Qint ≃ 2 · 105 in the single photon regime and Qint ≃ 5 · 105 in the high power regime. In the future, we expect
that these Qint values can be further improved by using deep reactive ion etching
(DRIE) or interface passivation treatments [402,501,502] in the resonator fabrication
procedure. From the excellent performance of our resonators over a broad temperature and magnetic field range, we conclude that NbTiN deposited on Si (100)
substrates constitutes an ideal material platform for field-robust magnon-photon
hybrid devices. Consequently, in a second step, we use our optimized NbTiN
resonators for the implementation of on-chip magnon-photon hybrid devices. We

156

Chapter 8

Summary and Outlook

realized such devices by fabricating a ferromagnetic Co25Fe75(CoFe) on top of the
superconducting microwave resonators. In our experiments, we have investigated
two different types of hybrid devices, where the CoFe has been (i) coupled either
directly to the NbTiN layer or (ii) grown on top of an insulating AlN layer to investigate the impact of the direct ferromagnetic exchange field on the magnon-photon
coupling. While for devices of the former type we observed high magnetic loss
rates and a reduced effective magnon-photon coupling rate geff , for samples of the
latter type, we found strong coupling with an effective magnon-photon coupling
rate of geff /(2π) = (120 ± 4) MHz, resulting in an estimated coupling rate per
Bohr magneton of g0 ≈ 223 Hz and a cooperativity of C ≈ 136 at a temperature of
T = 3 K. Magnon-photon hybrid systems are of interest for the implementation
of high-speed coherent transducers for circuit quantum electrodynamics [79, 438]
and for the transmission of spin excitations via photons [439, 440]. Our results are
comparable to state of the art magnon-photon devices [79, 80] and unite the high
g0 with the usage of a hard type-II-superconductor. This combination offers the
perspective to push these devices to higher operating temperatures. For the fabrication of a new generation of NbTiN/CoFe magnon-photon hybrid devices, the
observed sizable κs for CoFe in hybrid devices has to be reduced. To this end, for
example an additional buffer layer between the AlN and CoFe could be inserted or
alternatively, the impact of the buffered oxide etch before NbTiN deposition could
be tested to obtain resonators with reduced surface roughness, which would likely
translate to a CoFe growth on a less rough under layer. Furthermore, we note, that
the realization of strong magnon-photon coupling using 3d magnetic materials
such as CoFe in this thesis and Permalloy in Refs. [79, 80] could in principle allow
to electrically control the magnetic properties of the thin film magnetic layer via
voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy [503–505] and thus to tune the achievable
magnon-photon coupling rates. Finally, it is worth mentioning, that the realized
planar on-chip magnon-photon hybrid devices can be straightforwardly integrated
into existing planar superconducting Qubit architectures for example via flip-chip
bonding [506–508].

8.4 Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic
wave resonator/ magnetic thin films hybrids
As discussed in Chapter 7, we have performed experiments to study the
magnetoelastic coupling between the ferromagnetic resonance modes in a metallic
Co25Fe75 thin film and standing transverse elastic waves in crystalline sapphire,
silicon and gadolinium gallium garnet substrates. In our experiments, the single
crystalline substrates serve as bulk acoustic wave resonators. Standing elastic waves in these resonators are excited by driving FMR in the ferromagnetic
films deposited on them via magnetoelastic coupling. Altogether, this leads

8.4

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films hybrids

157

to a finite coupling between the FMR mode in the ferromagnetic film and the
transverse acoustic elastic modes (transverse acoustic phonons) in the substrate.
The broadband ferromagnetic resonance experiments are performed at cryogenic
temperatures. For all substrate materials, we observe an interaction between
two resonant standing-wave modes with the magnetic Kittel mode. We identify
these modes as the two orthogonally polarized transverse shear waves. As these
waves propagated with slightly different velocities in particular directions, we
observe phononic birefringence for all substrates. We note that the combination
of an experimentally simple but efficient ferromagnetic excitation scheme using
ferromagnetic resonance with crystalline substrates hosting long-lived phonons
could allow for the realization of phononic λ/4-plates [470], to convert linear
into circularly polarized phonons and vice-versa by making use of this phononic
birefringence [493]. However, to this end, optimal working points in frequency,
driving field and overlap of the two transverse acoustic phonons modes need to
be identified. Therefore, in a second step, we exemplarily study the frequencyand temperature-dependence of the magnetoelastic coupling of a CoFe thin film
with the standing transverse elastic waves of a sapphire substrate. We observe a
strong decrease in the relaxation rate of the elastic modes with decreasing T and
correspondingly a considerable enhancement of the cooperativity C of the coupled
magnon-phonon system, which highlight the importance of performing these
experiments at cryogenic temperatures. However, the strongly increased elastic
loss rate ηa at elevated temperatures gives rise to a substantial mode overlap of
the two transverse elastic waves allowing for the injection of circularly polarized
phonons into the host crystal. Hence, we find that in particular the sample temperature constitutes a control knob to select the chirality of the pumped phonons.
Regarding the magnetic loss rate of the CoFe layer, we find a relatively constant
Gilbert damping as function of T, which renders the CoFe/Al2O3 material platform a temperature-robust alternative to the commonly investigated YIG on GGG
substrate hybrid devices [77, 158–160]. Most importantly, the usage of CoFe allows
the free choice of substrate material and its integration into more complex device
layouts. Finally, the sensitive tuning of f FSR to relative changes in substrate thickness of the order of ∆L/L ≃ 10−4 of this CoFe/Al2O3 hybrid sample is of interest
for the realization of Magnetic micro-actuators and systems (MAGMAS) [494–497].
Concepts to achieve higher effective magnetoelastic coupling rates for magnonphonon hybrid devices operating in the strong and ultra-strong coupling regime
revolve around realizing BAW resonators with lower mode volumes for example
in the form of freestanding membranes [509, 510]. Notably, there already exist
methods for the growth of ultrathin sapphire membranes [511, 512], which could
be straightforwardly interfaced with thin film CoFe layers and characterized in
terms of their coupling regimes in future experiments. On the other hand, the
perspective to transport angular momentum via phonons could allow for the
realization of phononic spin valve devices [77]. For an electrical control of the

158

Chapter 8

Summary and Outlook

phononic spin transport in such devices, the propagation velocities of the transverse acoustic phonon modes, piezoelectric materials such as Lithium niobate
(LiNbO3, LNO) can be used as BAW resonators. Notably, the good acoustic
properties of LNO and sizable coupling rates of CoFe on LNO BAW resonators
has been realized under the guidance of the author by Keita Takahashi during his
Bachelors’ thesis [513], though in his experiments, a potential tuning of the BAW
resonances in LNO under an applied gate voltage was masked by thermal effects.
However, as the tuning of the resonances in piezoelectric BAW resonators via an
applied gate voltage has recently been experimentally demonstrated in Ref. [514],
we expect, that additional experiments in a thermally stable environment will also
unambiguously reveal this effect in our CoFe on LNO BAW resonator devices thus
paving the way towards the control of phononic spin transport in BAW resonators.
In conclusion, within this thesis, high sensitivity microwave spectroscopy
experiments at cryogenic temperatures have been performed to characterize the
magnetization dynamics of various hybrid systems. New materials have been
grown and characterized and new data analysis methods as well as novel concepts
have been developed to pave the way for the efficient manipulation and control of
magnetization dynamics in hybrid systems. Most importantly, this includes the
coherent transfer of angular momentum in these hybrid systems, which enables
engineering of magnetization dynamics in and applying frequency conversion
schemes to magnetic hybrid systems.

8.4

Magnon-Phonon coupling in bulk acoustic wave resonator/ magnetic thin films hybrids

159

A

Appendix A: Additional
experiments on the magnetic
properties of γ-Fe2O3

In this section, we present the results of energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy
(EDS) experiments on the γ-Fe2O3 thin film investigated in Ch. 4 the main text
and FMR results of additional γ-Fe2O3 thin films.

A1 Identification of potential slowly relaxing
impurities
To identify the potential present impurities in our samples, we perform
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) using a scanning electron microscope
(SEM). In Fig. A.1, we plot the integrated detected x-ray intensity as a function
of x-ray energy E recorded for a scanned area of 50 × 40 µm2 of the 52.6 nm thick
γ-Fe2O3 thin film.

In te n s ity ( a r b . u n it)

1 0 6

M g
K α

O
K α

1 0 5

F e
L α
C

1 0

4

F e
W

K α

M

1 0 3

α

*

K α
K β

1 0

2

1 0 1

0 .1

1 .0

1 0 .0

E n e rg y (k e V )

Fig. A.1. – EDS energy spectrum of the 52.6 nm thick γ-Fe2O3 thin film. Peaks are labeled
with the corresponding element and energy shell. Blue labels correspond to peaks from
elements, which comprise the MgO substrate and γ-Fe2O3 thin film, whereas red labels
represent peaks from unexpected elements, which we attribute to contaminants present
in the SEM.

The visible peaks in Fig. A.1 allow to identify the different atomic species
present in our samples. Particularly pronounced are the signatures of oxygen,
magnesium and iron atoms in agreement with the used MgO substrate and the γFe2O3 thin film (blue labels). The observed small Kα peak from carbon is attributed
to carbon impurities on the sample surface, whereas the tungsten Mα -peak most
likely stems from the point source cathode of the SEM. The additional peak at
E ≈ 2.504 keV (cf. asterisk in Fig. A.1) can however not be directly matched

161

to the energy shell of any element. We speculate that it originates from the
molybdenum Lfi,2 -shell at E ≈ 2.518 keV from abrasions of the tweezers used for
sample handling. To our knowledge, neither C, Mo nor W impurities have been
found to induce slowly relaxing impurity damping mechanisms. As we observe
no additional peaks from elements, known to induce slowly relaxing impurity
damping such as e.g. Si [147], Ir [246], Yb [245], Nd [247] and Ge [82], they
constitute a mass fraction for our maghemite thin films below the detection limit
of the used SEM setup (w < 0.1 wt%), which is too low to affect the magnetization
dynamics in our samples. As discussed in the main text (see Sec. 4.3), an alternative
candidate for slowly relaxing impurities are unpaired Fe2+ -ions [147, 235–237]
caused by the oxygen deficiency in our samples.

A2 Additional data on magnetic properties of
maghemite films
In addition to the data of the 52.6 nm thick maghemite thin film, we here
present the results of our cryogenic bbFMR experiments for the magnetization
dynamics and slowly relaxing impurity parameters of a 45.0 nm thick maghemite
film as a function of temperature T in Fig. A2. Here, the parameters describing
the slowly relaxing impurities are again derived under the assumption of a
temperature independent g-factor g = 2.022 (see Sec. 4.3). For the effective
magnetization in Fig. A2(a), we observe a continuous increase with decreasing
T and Meff exhibits a sign change at Tcross = 25 K. For the Gilbert damping α in
panel (b), we find approximately constant values down to T = 25 K, followed by
a steep increase at lower T. Similarly to Fig. 4.6 from the main text, this abrupt
increase in damping coincides with the sign change in Meff . This correspondence
indicates, that the change in anisotropy from easy-axis to easy-plane in our
samples affects the Gilbert damping in our thin films. Regarding the slowly
relaxing impurity parameter CF ( T ) in Fig. A2(c), we observe a strong reduction
with increasing temperature. In contrast to Fig. A2(c) from the main, a peak-like
feature in CF ( T ) is not evident due to the reduced number of recorded data points
in the low temperature regime. For higher temperatures, the behavior in CF ( T ) is
in agreement with the results in Fig. A2(c) of the main text. We perform a fit to
the product of Eqs. (2.40) and (2.41) [red line in Fig. A2(c)] and extract the fitting
parameters Eslow = (0.55 ± 0.07) meV and C · T = (78 ± 12) GHz·K. These values
coincide with fitting results for the 52.6 nm thick maghemite sample in the main
text and thereby demonstrate that the FMR results presented in the main text
are representative for our maghemite films. Finally, for the relaxation time τ in
panel (d), we find an approximately constant τ for elevated temperatures and
a strong increase for T < 50 K. We fit the τ values for T ≤ 50 K to Eq. (4.1) and
obtain EA = (6.2 ± 0.3) meV and τ0 = (19.3 ± 0.2) ps. These fitting values are in

162

Chapter A

Appendix A: Additional experiments on the magnetic properties of γ-Fe2O3

(a )

0

( 1 0 -3 )

-2 5

e ff

µ 0M

(b )

T c ro s s

a

(m T )

2 5

8

-5 0

6

4
(c )
6

(d )

C F (T ) (G H z )

2 0

t

(p s )

4

1 0
2

0
0

1 0 0

2 0 0
T (K )

3 0 0

0

1 0 0

2 0 0

3 0 0

T (K )

Fig. A2. – Magnetization dynamics and slowly relaxing impurity parameters of the
45.0 nm thick maghemite film as a function of temperature T. (a) Effective magnetization
Meff and (b) Gilbert damping parameter α as function of T. (c) Magnitude of the
slowly relaxing impurity contribution CF ( T ) together with a theoretical fitting curve
for F ( T ) following the product of Eqs. (2.40) and (2.41) (red line). We obtain the slowly
relaxing impurity parameters Eslow = (0.55 ± 0.07) meV and C · T = (78 ± 12) GHz·K. (d)
Relaxation time τ as a function of T. The red line represents a fit to Eq. (4.1). We extract
EA = (6.2 ± 0.4) meV and τ0 = (19.3 ± 0.2) ps.

good agreement to the fitting results from Fig. A2(d) from the main text, while the
fitted activation energy EA is a factor or two larger than for the thicker maghemite
sample.

A2 Additional data on magnetic properties of maghemite films

163

A3 Additional FMR-results for γ − Fe2O3 thin
films
In Fig. A3, we present additional room temperature FMR results for three
γ-Fe2O3 thin films of varying thickness d (see Tab. A1). For these three films, we
again observe a reduced effective magnetization attributed to a perpendicular
magnetic anisotropy and a non-linear behavior in ∆H as function of frequency,
which we interpret with the slow-relaxor model. The raw data for Hres and ∆H
(a )

d (n m )
2 0 .6
3 2 .4
3 9 .7

1 .0

µ 0H

re s

(T )

1 .5

0 .5

0 .0
(b )

µ 0 ∆H ( m T )

6 0

3 0

0
0

1 0

2 0

3 0

4 0

f (G H z )

Fig. A3. – Room temperature FMR results for three γ-Fe2O3 thin films of varying thickness
d (see Tab. A1). (a) Raw data of the extracted resonance field Hres together with a fit
following Eq. (2.37). (b) Raw data of the extracted resonance linewidth ∆H together with
a fit following Eq. (2.38).

are fitted with equations (2.37) and (2.38) under the assumption of a constant gfactor of g = 2.022. The resulting fitted magnetization dynamics and slow-relaxor
parameters are listed in Table A1. They correspond well with the FMR-parameters
of the 52.8 nm and 45.0 nm thick γ-Fe2O3-samples at RT.

164

Chapter A

Appendix A: Additional experiments on the magnetic properties of γ-Fe2O3

d (nm)
20.6
32.4
39.7

µ0 Meff (mT)
41±2
-30±1
14±1

α (10−3 )
5.6±1.1
8.6±0.6
2.2±0.8

CF ( T ) (GHz)
4.5±0.4
4.7±0.6
6.5±0.3

τ (ps)
6.1±0.2
6.4±0.3
5.9±0.2

Tab. A1. – FMR and slow-relaxor model parameters of the three additional γ-Fe2O3 thin
films.

A3 Additional FMR-results for γ − Fe2 O3 thin films

165

B

Appendix B: Sputter deposition
parameters

In the following we summarize the deposition parameters used for the individual
sputtered materials of the hybrid devices investigated in Chapters 5,6 and 7 using
the Superbowls and Ultradisk sputtering systems (see Sec. 3.1).

B1 Sputter deposition parameters
B2 Superbowls
Target material
Cu
Co25Fe75
NbN
Py
Pt
Pt in sample C
Ta
TaN (NC)
TaN (SC)

P /A [W/cm2 ]
0.8
0.8
2.1
3.1
1.2
0.2
1.2
1.2
1.2

r [Å/s]
1.0
2.1
4.0
3.1
4.2
0.2
0.5
1.1
1.3

T [◦ C]
RT
RT
400
RT
RT
RT
RT
500
500

N2 /Ar-ratio
1.9/18.1
1.0/10
3.5/10

Tab. B1. – Sputtering parameters of the materials grown in the Superbowl. All materials
were grown at a deposition pressure pdepo =5 × 10−3 mbar.

B3 Ultradisk
Target material
Nb70Ti30N

P /A [W/cm2 ]
0.9

r [Å/s]
0.8

T [◦ C]
500

N2 /Ar-ratio
3.8/36.2

Tab. B2. – Sputtering parameters of the materials grown in the Ultradisk. All materials
were grown at deposition pressure pdepo =5 × 10−3 mbar.

167

Appendix C: Determination of
the superconducting transition
temperature via microwave
spectroscopy

C

This section outlines the method used to determine the superconducting transition
temperature of the SC/FM-heterostructures investigated in Ch. 5.
To determine Tc of our samples from the microwave response in |S21 | as
function of T is derived in Refs. [68, 122]. we recorded |S21 | at fixed frequencies
as function of sample temperature. Exemplary data is shown in Fig. C1 at f 0 =
30 GHz for sample B from Ch. 5.
We observe a steep increase in |S21 | below 9 K, which we attribute to the onset
of superconductivity. For a quantitative description of the observed behavior, we
used the following expression for |S21 | normalized by the transmission parameter
of an unloaded CPW |S021 | [308].


S21
|γ0 Zeff |l
∝ exp −
.
0
2Z0
S21

(C.1)

|S 2 1 | (d B )

Here, l represents the sample’s length on the CPW, Zeff and Z0 stand for the thin
film surface impedance and unloaded CPW-impedance, respectively. Additionally,
γ0 = ω/vph is the complex propagation factor, where f = ω/2π and vph is the phase
velocity of microwaves in the CPW. For Zeff , we use the superconducting surface
impedance [86]

-2 0

-2 5
T c
-3 0
0

f0 = 3 0 G H z
4

8
T (K )

Fig. C1. – Microwave transmission |S21 | recorded at a fixed microwave frequency
f 0 =30 GHz as a function of normalized temperature for sample B. The steep increase in
Tc fitted using Eq. (C.4). We extract a London penetration depth of λL =(1.12 ± 0.06) µm.

169

Zeff (ω ) ≈ −i · µ0 ωλeff .

(C.2)

We note, that the T-dependence of |S21 | is governed by that of the London
penetration depth λL , most commonly described by the Casimir-Görter-model
[361]
λL (0)
.
(C.3)
λL ( T ) = p
1 − ( T/Tc )4
We insert Eq. (C.2) into (C.1) and obtain the result
NC
|S21 | = |S21
| + |∆S21 | exp



|γ0 |lµ0 ωλ2L (0)
−
2Z0 dSC (1 − ( T/Tc )4 )


(C.4)

NC | represents the complex transmission magnifor our fitting function, where |S21
tude in the normal state and |∆S21 | is the magnitude of the change in S21 below
Tc . The resulting fitting curve is shown in Fig. C1 using the dSC = 16 nm, l = 6
mm, vph = 1.8 · 108 m/s (used by Schmidt et. al. in Ref. [308]) and Z0 =50 Ω. We
extract a London penetration depth of λL =(1.12 ± 0.06) µm, which is considerably
larger than literature values for NbN, ranging from 200 nm to 400 nm [314, 315].
We attribute this to disorder. In disordered superconductors, a correction factor is
added to λL of the form [515]

λL (0) = λL∞ (0)



ξ ∞ (0)
1+
l0

1/2
,

(C.5)

where ξ ∞ and l0 are the bulk superconducting coherence length and mean free
path respectively. Using l0 =3.96 Å [516], ξ ∞ = 5 nm [257] and λL∞ (0) = 300
nm, we obtain λL (0) ≈ 1 µm, which agrees well with our experimental results.
Furthermore, we note that an unusually large λL has also been observed for
SC/FM-bilayers in [517], where it was attributed to the depletion of the superconducting fluid density ns at the FM interface. The respective Tc and λL of the
samples from Sec. 5.2 are listed in Tab. C1.
Sample
Tc [K]
λL [µm]

A
11.5
0.84

B
9.0
1.12

C
10.0
0.71

D
10.2
0.96

Tab. C1. – Superconducting transition temperature Tc and estimated London penetration
depth λL of samples discussed in Sec. 5.2.

170

Chapter C Appendix C: Determination of the superconducting transition temperature

D

Appendix D: Raw data for the
reduced inductance

In this section, we exemplarily present raw data for the complex reduced inductance of the SC/FM-heterostructures investigated in Ch. 5 for temperatures, where
the used SC layer is in both the normal- and superconducting state.

8 0

8 0

8 0

~

Im (L ) (fH )
Im (L ) (fH )

4 0
N b N /P y (A )
0
8 0

(c )

~

4 0
P t/N b N /P y (B )
0
8 0

(e )

~

4 0
N b N /P t(0 .5 )/P y (C )
0
8 0

(g )

0

~

4 0
0

N b N /P t(1 5 )/P y (D )
1 0
2 0
f (G H z )

3 0

(b )

8 0

Im (L ) (fH )

(a )

8 0

Im (L ) (fH )

~

R e (L ) (fH )

~

R e (L ) (fH )

~

R e (L ) (fH )

~

R e (L ) (fH )

) (a )
D1 Reduced ( a inductance
at room temperature

4 0
0
(d )

4 0
0
(f)

4 0
0
(h )

Im a g
P y B e ll
In v P y B e ll
C 1
P y B e ll
B 1
im S O T ( U s e r ) F it o f P " In v P y B e ll"

4 0
0
0

1 0

2 0

3 0

f (G H z )

Fig. D1. – Real and imaginary part of the reduced inductance L̃ at room temperature
for samples A-D. Samples B and D exhibit an iSHE as apparent from the slopes of Im( L̃)
in panels (d) and (h). Due to the enhanced damping in the NbN/thick Pt/Py-trilayer
(sample D), the strongly broadened FMR-linewidth above 25ĠHz leads to an imprecise
fitting. Hence these data-points are omitted in the fitting of L̃ [see gray data points in
˙
panels (g) and (h)]. Lines in the graphs are fits using Eq.(5.14).

In Fig. D1, we show raw data of the reduced complex inductance L̃ for the
four NbN/Py-heterostructures from Sec. 5.2 of the main text at room temperature
in real and imaginary part. For all samples, Re( L̃) in Fig. D1 exhibits a similar
y-axis intercept as well as a linear frequency dependence. For its imaginary part
Im( L̃), the samples display different behaviors. Sample B and D exhibit a large
positive slope, while sample A, devoid of platinum, exhibits only a minor positive
slope. These results are in line with our expectations that the slope in Im( L̃) is
governed by the iSHE from spin pumping into Pt. Hence, the slope in Im( L̃), is
the largest in samples containing thick Pt-layers and absent in the red data points
of sample A. All curves converge towards the origin for zero frequency, which is

171

expected as in the dc limit ( f =0 Hz), the inductance is a real value. This condition
is well met in our samples. However, we refrain from rotating L̃ = (Re( L̃), Im( L̃))
by a rotational matrix with angle β to ensure Im( L̃)( f = 0) = 0 as performed
in [40, 84]. Our reasoning is that the inductive coupling L̃0 changes slightly with
temperature giving rise to artifacts in our temperature-dependent study, when
rotating each data point with a slightly different angle β for each temperature.

D2 Reduced inductance in the superconducting
state
4 0 0 (a )

Im (L ) (fH )

N b N /P y (A )

4 0 0 (b )
2 0 0

0
4 0 0 (d )

P t/N b N /P y (B )

0
4 0 0 (c )
2 0 0

0
4 0 0 (e )

0
4 0 0 (f)
2 0 0

~

2 0 0

Im (L ) (fH )

~

2 0 0

Im (L ) (fH )

~

2 0 0

N b N /P t(0 .5 )/P y (C )
0

4 0 0 (g )
N b N /P t(1 5 )/P y (D )

0
4 0 0 (h )
2 0 0

~

2 0 0

Im (L ) (fH )

R e ( L~ ) ( f H )

~

R e (L ) (fH )

~

R e (L ) (fH )

~

R e (L ) (fH )

We plot the reduced inductance of our samples at T ≈ 0.5 × Tc in Fig. D2.

0
0

1 0

2 0

3 0

0
0

1 0

f (G H z )

2 0

3 0

f (G H z )

Fig. D2. – Real and imaginary part of the reduced inductance L̃ for samples A-D below
the superconducting transition temperature Tc . Dramatic changes in both L̃0 and Lj are
apparent. The omitted data points for the NbN/thick Pt/Py-trilayer (sample D) are again
shown as grey data points. Continuous lines represent fits to the data using Eq. (5.14).

We observe an enhancement in the inductive coupling strength L̃0 , which
can be well explained by superconducting image charge currents repelling the
oscillatory driving field of the CPW hrf (see Sec. 5.1). We observe a 6 to 7-times
enhancement of L̃0 in the SC-state. We observe a reduction and sign change
for Im(L̃), which indicates the blocking of normal state spin currents and the
quasiparticle mediated iSHE in the SC state as well as slightly negative Re(L̃)
corresponding to a positive field-like spin torques σf of unknown origin. Moreover,
an oscillatory behavior of L̃ in both real and imaginary part is apparent, which is
discussed in Sec. 5.2.

172

Chapter D

Appendix D: Raw data for the reduced inductance

E

Appendix E: Sputter deposition
parameters of the TaN thin films
of the growth optimization study

In the following, we list the deposition parameters, superconducting properties
and volume densities DV for the TaN films deposited in the growth optimization
study in Sec. 5.3.1.

E1 N2/Ar-gas flow ratio series
N2 /Ar [%]

Tdepo [◦ C]

Pdepo [W]

pdepo [mbar]

Tc [ K ]

∆Tc [K]

DV [g/cm3 ]

5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

500
500
500
500
500
500
500
500
500
500

30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30

0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005

3.51
4.14
4.97
4.65
3.54
-

0.71
1.11
1.26
1.24
0.98
-

14.7
15.2
14.6
14.2
14.4
13.4
13.8
13.1
12.6
12.9

Tab. E1. – Deposition parameters, superconducting transition temperature Tc and width
∆Tc as well as volume density DV for TaN films grown for varying N2 /Ar gas flow ratios.

173

E2 Deposition temperature series
N2 /Ar [%]

Tdepo [◦ C]

Pdepo [W]

pdepo [mbar]

Tc [ K ]

∆Tc [K]

DV [g/cm3 ]

35
35
35
35
35
35
35
35

100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800

30
30
30
30
30
30
30
30

0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005

4.97
3.07
3.68
4.72

1.26
0.54
0.96
0.60

12.2
12.5
12.7
13.0
13.8
13.8
14.1
14.0

Tab. E2. – Deposition parameters, superconducting transition temperature Tc and width
∆Tc as well as volume density DV for TaN films grown for varying deposition temperatures Tdepo .

E3 Deposition power series
N2 /Ar [%]

Tdepo [◦ C]

Pdepo [W]

pdepo [mbar]

Tc [ K ]

∆Tc [K]

DV [g/cm3 ]

35
35
35
35
35
35

500
500
500
500
500
500

15
30
45
60
75
90

0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005
0.005

4.97
3.81
-

1.26
0.78
-

13.0
13.8
14.3
14.4
14.8
15.0

Tab. E3. – Deposition parameters, superconducting transition temperature Tc and width
∆Tc as well as volume density DV for TaN films grown for varying deposition powers
Pdepo .

174

Chapter E

Appendix E: Sputter deposition parameters of the TaN thin films

E4 Deposition pressure series
N2 /Ar [%]

Tdepo [◦ C]

Pdepo [W]

pdepo [mbar]

Tc [ K ]

∆Tc [K]

DV [g/cm3 ]

35
35
35
35

500
500
500
500

30
30
30
30

0.002
0.0035
0.005
0.007

4.31
4.45
4.97
3.49

0.97
1.02
1.26
0.92

13.9
13.8
13.8
13.0

Tab. E4. – Deposition parameters, superconducting transition temperature Tc and width
∆Tc as well as volume density DV for TaN films grown for varying deposition pressures
pdepo .

E4

Deposition pressure series

175

F

Appendix F: Superconducting
NbTiN microwave resonators

In this subsection, we present x-ray diffraction results of NbTiN thin films deposited in the Ulatradisk, as well as a list of the individual quality factors and
participation ratios of our NbTiN resonators investigated in Ch. 6.

F1 X-ray diffraction results of NbTiN thin film
grown on HF-dipped Si
In this section of the Appendix, we present the results of x-ray diffraction
experiments on the NbTiN thin films grown on the BOE treated Si-substrate in
Fig. F1. Note, that all the other NbTiN thin films in the study of Ch. 6 did not
exhibit crystalline reflections. The 2θ − ω x-ray diffraction scan in Fig. F1(a)
1 0 0

(a )

(b )

(2 0 0 )

1 0

In te n s ity ( c p s )

In te n s ity ( c p s )

3 0

n o (1 1 1 )

1
3 4

3 6

3 8
2θ ( °)

4 0

4 2

2 0
1 0
0

1 8

2 0

2 2
ω ( °)

Fig. F1. – (a) 2θ − ω x-ray diffraction scan of the NbTiN film grown on HF-dipped
(001)-oriented Si. We observe a peak originating from a preferential (200) orientation
of cubic NbTiN but no evidence for a preferred (111) orientation. (b) Rocking curve of
the (200)-reflection. The red line indicates a gaussian fit to the raw data. We extract a
full-width at half maximum (FWHM) of FWHM= (1.19 ± 0.01)◦ .

shows the preferred cubic NbTiN growth in the (200) orientation on the Si (001)
substrate. In Fig. F1(b), we fit the extracted rocking curve of the (200)-reflection
of NbTiN to a gaussian fit and extract a full-width at half maximum (FWHM)
of FWHM= (1.19 ± 0.01)◦ , which indicates a textured growth in agreement to
literature (see Refs. [409, 518]).
As the (200)-reflection peak could only be detected for a NbTiN film grown on
the BOE treated Si-substrate, we infer that the removal of the native SiO2 -layer
promotes the textured growth of cubic NbTiN.

177

F2 Quality factors of our NbTiN resonators
We here list the individual quality factors of the investigated resonators,
which were used as a basis for the statistical mean values and standard deviations
for the individual samples listed in Tab. 6.2. Resonators that have been excluded
from the statistical evaluation are marked with an asterisk ∗ .
• Nb70Ti30N on thermally oxidized Si:
Resonator
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5

fr (GHz)
5.256
5.398
5.525
5.689
5.769

Q (×103 )
15.0±0.1
8.0±0.1
6.7±0.4
6.1±0.5
10.4±0.1

Qint (×103 )
26.2±0.1
9.4±0.1
10.0±0.4
7.7±0.6
12.9±0.1

Qext (×103 )
35.4±0.1
54.9±1.0
19.8±4.2
29.4±1.4
54.3±0.1

Tab. F1. – Extracted fitting parameters for resonance frequency f r , quality factor Q,
internal quality factor Qint and external quality factor Qext for the on chip resonators of
the chip, where NbTiN was grown on thermally oxidized Si. Measurements are performed
at T = 2.2 K and at a microwave power corresponding to ≃ 107 photons on average in the
resonator.

• Nb70Ti30N on thermally oxidized Si (PTB):
Resonator
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5

fr (GHz)
4.485
4.584
4.697
4.793
4.870

Q (×103 )
16.5±0.1
8.5±0.1
13.2±0.8
10.2±0.1
10.0±0.1

Qint (×103 )
29.7±0.2
15.8±0.1
16.6±0.8
33.1±0.3
11.3±0.2

Qext (×103 )
37.4±0.1
18.4±0.1
66.0±2.8
14.7±0.1
89.4±0.4

Tab. F2. – Extracted fitting parameters for resonance frequency f r , quality factor Q,
internal quality factor Qint and external quality factor Qext for the on chip resonators
of the chip, where NbTiN was grown on thermalized Si at the PTB. Measurements are
performed at T = 2.2 K and at a microwave power corresponding to ≃ 107 photons on
average in the resonator.

178

Chapter F

Appendix F: Superconducting NbTiN microwave resonators

• Nb70Ti30N on pristine Si:
Resonator
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5

fr (GHz)
4.674
4.803
4.928
5.034
5.133

Q (×103 )
19.8±0.4
48.9±1.5
26.7±2.5
9.3±0.2
37.7±0.6

Qint (×103 )
196.3±23.2
262.5±26.2
373.8±27.6
123.8±15.2
84.9±2.9

Qext (×103 )
22.0±0.1
60.1±0.4
28.8±0.8
10.1±0.1
67.9±0.5

Tab. F3. – Extracted fitting parameters for resonance frequency f r , quality factor Q,
internal quality factor Qint and external quality factor Qext for the on chip resonators
of the chip, where NbTiN was grown on pristine Si. Measurements are performed at
T = 2.2 K and at a microwave power corresponding to ≃ 107 photons on average in the
resonator.

• Nb70Ti30N on Si + HF dip:

Resonator
R1
R2
R3
R4
R5∗

fr (GHz)
4.672
4.806
4.924
5.026
5.133

Q (×103 )
84.7±1.4
61.0±0.1
84.3±0.6
69.4±2.3
17.9±0.1

Qint (×103 )
215.2±9.0
152.2±5.3
207.8±3.8
161.7±12.0
50.6±0.1

Qext (×103 )
139.7±0.1
101.9±0.1
141.9±0.1
121.5±0.1
27.9±0.1

Tab. F4. – Extracted fitting parameters for resonance frequency f r , quality factor Q,
internal quality factor Qint and external quality factor Qext for the on chip resonators of
the chip, where NbTiN was grown on HF-treated Si. Measurements are performed at
T = 2.2 K and at a microwave power corresponding to ≃ 107 photons on average in the
resonator.

We attribute the unusually bad performance of resonator R5 for the sample, where
NbTiN was grown on HF-treated Si to a small scratch on the meander structure
of the resonator.

F3 Participation ratios and loss tangents extracted
from simulation
The numerically calculated participation ratios of the four dielectric regions
for our resonator layout are listed in Tab. F5. The total loss induced by TLS,
0
F tanδTLS
≈ 0.5 · 10−6 , is the sum of the listed pi tan(δi ).

F3 Participation ratios and loss tangents extracted from simulation

179

pi
tan(δi )
pi tan(δi )
di (nm)
ei /e0

metal-air
3.4E-6
3.3E-3
1.1E-8
2
10

metal-substrate
2.4E-4
2.7E-4
6.5E-8
2
11.4

substrate-air
1.6E-4
1.2E-3
2E-7
2
11.4

substrate
0.89
2.6E-7
2.3E-7
2
11.9

Tab. F5. – Numerically calculated participation ratios pi , assumed loss tangents tan(δi ),
layer thicknesses di and dielectric constants ei /e0 of the four dielectric regions, following
Ref. [401].

180

Chapter F

Appendix F: Superconducting NbTiN microwave resonators

G

Appendix G: Magnetoelastic
coupling in CoFe on Al2O3
substrates

In this section, we present additional MEC experiments for CoFe grown on Al2O3
BAW substrates as function of frequency, present simulation results for the MEC
and discuss the frequency splitting ∆ f of the MEC features for other substrate
materials as function of frequency.

G1 Determination of the parameters describing the
magnetization dynamics in CoFe
To determine the magnetization dynamics parameters of the CoFe/Al2O3
sample investigated at cryogenic temperatures in Sec. 7.1, we perform broadband
ferromagnetic resonance (FMR) experiments in the oop-geomety. We fit the raw
data using Eq. (2.20) and extract the uncoupled FMR resonance frequency and
linewidth in a frequency spacing in the GHz range, where the contributions
from the elastic resonances average out. Fig. G1(a) and (b) show the raw data for
the resonance field Hres ( f ) and linewidth ∆H ( f ) of the Al2O3/CoFe sample at
T = 5 K. To characterize the effective magnetization Meff and the g-factor of the
(a )
4

(b )

re s

(T )

µ 0 ∆H ( m T )

1 0

µ 0H

3

2
0

2 0
f (G H z )

4 0

0

5

0

2 0

4 0

f (G H z )

Fig. G1. – (a) Resonance field µ0 Hres ( f ) of the Al2O3/CoFe sample at T = 5 K plotted
versus frequency. The line shows a fit to Eq. (2.24). (b) Resonance linewidth µ0 ∆H ( f ) of
the Al2O3/CoFe sample at T = 5 K together with a fit to Eq. (2.28) (red line).

magnetic system g, the frequency dependence of the resonance field Hres ( f ) is
fitted using Eq. (2.24). We extract a g-factor of g = 2.079 ± 0.001 and an effective
magnetization µ0 Meff = (2.381 ± 0.004) T in agreement with the expected values
for CoFe of this material composition (Co25Fe75) [135]. The frequency dependency
of the FMR linewidth µ0 ∆H ( f ) is fitted with the linear model following Eq. (2.28)

181

to extract the Gilbert damping parameter α and the inhomogeneous broadening
µ0 Hinh . We extract an inhomogeneous line broadening of µ0 Hinh = (1.6 ± 0.2) mT
and a Gilbert damping α = (2.8 ± 0.1) · 10−3 in agreement with the values reported
in Ref. [135].

G1.1 Magnetization dynamics parameters of the CoFe layer
as function of temperature
In order to demonstrate the temperature-robust performance of the magnetization dynamics parameters of our CoFe thin films, we plot in Fig. G2 their
temperature dependence for the CoFe thin film grown on a both sides polished
c-axis Al2O3-substrate investigated in Sec. 7. For the g-factor in Fig. G2(a), we
observe no apparent temperature-dependence, while the effective magnetization
Meff in Fig. G2(b) decreases for increasing temperature due to the thermal excitation of magnons [86]. The Gilbert damping parameter α in Fig. G2(c) is roughly
constant. However, the inhomogeneous linewidth Hinh in Fig. G2(d) increases for
rising T, which we attribute to the phonon pumping [112].
2 .1 0
(a )

(b )

e ff ( T

2 .0 8

µ 0M

g

)

2 .4 0

2 .3 5

2 .0 6
(c )

(d )
4

( 1 0 -3 )

in h ( m T )

4

µ 0H

a

3

2

2
0

1 0 0

2 0 0
T (K )

3 0 0

0

1 0 0

2 0 0

3 0 0

T (K )

Fig. G2. – Temperature dependence of the magnetization dynamics parameters of the
CoFe on Al2O3 hybrid sample. (a) The g-factor is constant as function of T. (b) The effective
magnetization Meff decreases with increasing T due to the thermal excitation of magnons. (c) The Gilbert damping α is roughly constant as function of temperatures. (d) The
inhomogeneous linewidth broadening increases, which we attribute to the enhanced
phonon pumping contribution to ∆H.

182

Chapter G

Appendix G: Magnetoelastic coupling in CoFe on Al2O3 substrates

G2 Analytical expressions for the velocity splitting
of the transverse modes in various crystal systems
In the following, we derive analytical expressions for the velocity splitting
of the transverse elastic modes in both hexagonal and cubic BAW resonator
substrates. We reshape the stress tensor in terms of displacement u using


∂u j
1 ∂ui
+
,
(G.1)
ε i,j =
2 ∂x j
∂xi

where coordinates are denoted as x x , xy , xz . We rotate the strain tensor taking
into account the deflection of c-axis by introducing an auxiliary cartesian coordinate system { x 0 , y0 , z0 }. The transformation of the strain tensor into x 0 y0 z0 -system
is given by
 
ε i0 ,j0 = ∑ R T 0 ε j,k Rk,j0 ,
i ,j

k,j

(G.2)

where the Euler matrix reads



cos θ 0 sin θ


R=
0
1
0 .
− sin θ 0 cos θ

(G.3)

This matrix describes the rotation of the c-axis away from the z-axis by an azimuthal angle θ. In the following we omit prime superscripts in notations, since
we do not discuss the ε i,j in the following equations. If we write the force density
in the form
fi = ∑
j

∂σi,j
,
∂x j

(G.4)

where the σi,j represent the components of the stress tensor, then Hooke’s equation
of motion reads
∂2 u i
∂ui
= fi ,
(G.5)
ρ 2 +Ξ
∂t
∂t
where ρ is the mass density, and Ξ = ηa ρ represents a measure of the elastic
damping. As solutions for these differential equations, we use the plane wave
ansatz of the form
u x,y,z = u x,y,z ei(ωt−k·r ) .

(G.6)

G2 Analytical expressions for the velocity splitting of the transverse modes

183

As we focus on standing waves along the thickness of the substrate, hence the
wave vector has only one component k = k z = nπ/L. Thus, the Hooke’s equation
yields a dispersion equation, which can be written in matrix form



a11 a12 a13


det  a21 a22 a23  = 0,
a31 a32 a33

(G.7)

The remaining task is now to insert the respective stress tensor components for
the individual crystal symmetries into Eq. (G.7) to derive the phononic dispersion
relations ω (k, θ ) of the individual modes. The group velocities of the acoustic
waves can then be calculated as
v g (θ ) =

∂ω
.
∂k

(G.8)

Finally, we can subtract the results for the fast and slow transverse elastic modes
vft and vst to obtain an expression for the velocity splitting ∆vt as function of the
miscut angle θ.

G2.1 Substrate with hexagonal crystallographic order
For the hexagonal Al2O3, the stress tensor components can be written as [519]
σx,x =
σy,y =
σz,z =
σy,z =
σx,z =
σx,y =

c11 ε x,x + c12 ε y,y + 2c14 ε y,z + c13 ε z,z
c12 ε x,x + c11 ε y,y − 2c14 ε y,z + c13 ε z,z
c13 ε x,x + c13 ε y,y + c33 ε z,z
σz,y = c14 ε x,x − c14 ε y,y + 2c44 ε y,z
σz,x = 2c14 ε x,y + 2c44 ε x,z
σy,x = (c11 − c12 ) ε x,y + 2c14 ε x,z ,

(G.9)

where the c pq represent the components of the compliance tensor in Voigt notation.
When inserting these σi,j in Eq. (G.7), we obtain
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33

= c44 k2 cos(2θ ) + iωΞ − ρω 2 ,
= −c14 k2 sin(θ ) ,
= −c44 k2 sin(2θ ) ,
= −c14 k2 sin(θ ) cos(θ ) ,
= c44 k2 cos(θ ) + iΞω − ρω 2 ,
= c14 k2 sin2 (θ ) ,
= (c13 − c33 ) k2 sin(θ ) cos(θ ) ,
= 0,

= −k2 c13 sin2 (θ ) + c33 cos2 (θ ) + ρω 2 − iΞω .

(G.10)

The explicit form of the determinant of Eq. (G.7) is not elucidative, we therefore turn to numerical results for the exact solution. We find that the velocities

184

Chapter G

Appendix G: Magnetoelastic coupling in CoFe on Al2O3 substrates

of two acoustic waves are almost the same v g ≈ 6.17 km/s for the parameters
from Ref. [478] and the difference between them depends on the deflection angle
θ away from the c-axis as shown in Fig. G3(a). For a miscut angle of θ = 0.017◦ ,
we obtain ∆v ≈ 0.5 m/s in agreement with the calculations in Sec. 7.1 using the
numerical Christoffel equation solver tool from Ref. [477].
0 .1 5
(a )

(b )

h e

0 .0
0 .0 0

xa

g o

l
n a

∆v t ( m / s )

∆v t ( m / s )

0 .5

0 .0 1
q

0 .0 2

0 .1 0
cu

b i

c

0 .0 5

0 .0 0

0 .0

( °)

0 .2

0 .4
q

( °)

Fig. G3. – (a) The difference between velocities of two acoustic waves calculated for
hexagonal Al2 O3 . The calculation parameters are k = 2π/L rad · m−1 , L = 510 mm,
ρ = 3970 kg/m3 , c11 = 5.00073 × 1011 Pa, c33 = 5.02385 × 1011 Pa, c44 = 1.51017 ×
1011 Pa, c12 = 1.61672 × 1011 Pa, c13 = 1.11368 × 1011 Pa, c14 = −2.32604 × 1010 Pa
and ηa /(2π) = 0.23 MHz, which are given in Ref. [478]. (b) The difference between
velocities of two acoustic waves calculated for cubic Si. The calculation parameters are
k = 2π/L rad · m−1 , L = 0.510 m, ρ = 3970 kg/m3 , c11 = 161.8 GPa, c12 = 64 GPa,
c44 = 76.1 GPa and ηa /(2π) = 0.23 MHz, which are extracted from Ref. [479].

G2.2 Cubic crystallographic order
We employ the same formalism to derive the velocity difference ∆vt of
acoustic waves in an elastic medium with cubic symmetry. In a cubic system, the
stress tensor elements are given by [519]
σx,x =
σy,y =
σz,z =
σy,z =
σx,z =
σx,y =

c11 ε x,x + c12 ε y,y + c12 ε z,z ,
c12 ε x,x + c11 ε y,y + c12 ε z,z ,
c12 ε x,x + c12 ε y,y + c11 ε z,z ,
σz,y = 2c44 ε y,z ,
σz,x = 2c44 ε x,z ,
σy,x = 2c44 ε x,y .

(G.11)

Performing the same procedure as for the hexagonal crystal, the dispersion
equation is given by


a11 a12 a13


det  a21 a22 a23  = 0,
(G.12)
a31 a32 a33

G2 Analytical expressions for the velocity splitting of the transverse modes

185

where
a11
a12
a13
a21
a22
a23
a31
a32
a33

= c44 k2 cos(2θ ) − ρω 2 + iΞω ,
= 0,
= −2c44 k2 sin(θ ) cos(θ ) ,
= 0,
= c44 k2 cos(θ ) − ρω 2 + iΞω ,
= 0,
= (c11 − c12 ) k2 sin(θ ) cos(θ ) ,
= 0,
= c12 k2 sin2 (θ ) + c11 k2 cos2 (θ ) − ρω 2 + iΞω .

(G.13)

The calculated ∆vt obtained by solving this equation is plotted in Fig. G3(b). Again,
we achieve a good likeness to the plot in Fig. 7.1(f).

G3 Temperature-dependence of the elastic
damping by the Landau-Rumer-mechanism
In the Landau-Rumer damping mechanism of transverse phonons, the attenuation coefficient ν( T ) of the transverse elastic waves is given by [471]
2
ν( T ) = 60γG

2πkB
· f · T4,
Mv3t Θ3D

(G.14)

where ΘD is the Debye temperature and γG is the Grüneisen parameter, whereas M
is the average atomic mass. Using the attenuation coefficient ν( T ) in combination
with the characteristic decay length δ = 2πvt /ηa [77], we can determine the elastic
relaxation rate by using

|u(δ)|
= exp(−νδ) = exp(−1).
|u(0)|

(G.15)

Here |u(z0 )| is the magnitude of acoustic modes after propagating distance z0
through the Al2O3 substrate in the z-direction. From Eq. (G.15), we obtain the
relation ηa = νvt = β a T 4 . By inserting γG = 2, ( Mv2t /kB ) = 135000 K and ΘD =
1000 K from Ref. [471] and vt = 6.17 km/s in Eq. (G.14), we obtain β a /(2π) ≈
3.2 · 10−2 Hz/K4 , which roughly corresponds with the obtained fitting values for
β a in Sec. 7.2.

186

Chapter G

Appendix G: Magnetoelastic coupling in CoFe on Al2O3 substrates

List of Publications
First author publications
• M. Müller, L. Liensberger, L. Flacke, H. Huebl, A. Kamra, W. Belzig, R. Gross,
M. Weiler, M. Althammer, Temperature-Dependent Spin Transport and CurrentInduced Torques in Superconductor-Ferromagnet Heterostructures, Physical Review Letters 126, 087201 (2021).
• M. Müller, R. Hoepfl, L. Liensberger, S. Geprägs, H. Huebl, M. Weiler,
R. Gross, M. Althammer, Growth optimization of TaN for superconducting
spintronics, Materials for Quantum Technology 1, 045001 (2021).
• M. Müller, T. Luschmann, A. Faltermeier, S. Weichselbaumer, L. Koch, G.B.P.
Huber, H.W. Schumacher, N. Ubbelohde, D. Reifert, T. Scheller, F. Deppe,
A. Marx, S. Filipp, M. Althammer, R. Gross, H. Huebl, Magnetic field robust
high quality factor NbTiN superconducting microwave resonators, Materials for
Quantum Technology 2, 015002 (2022).
• M. Müller, M. Scheufele, J. Gückelhorn, L. Flacke, M. Weiler, H. Huebl,
S. Gepraegs, R. Gross, M. Althammer, Reduced effective magnetization and
damping by slowly relaxing impurities in strained γ -Fe2O3 thin films, Journal of
Applied Physics 132, 233905 (2022).
• M. Müller, J. Weber, F. Engelhardt, V.A.S.V. Bittencourt, T. Luschmann,
M. Cherkasskii, S.T.B. Goennenwein, S.V. Kusminskiy, S. Gepraegs, R. Gross,
M. Althammer, H. Huebl, Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in ferromagnetic metal - bulk acoustic resonator hybrids, arxiv 2303.08429 (2023).

187

Co-author publications
• T.S. Suraj, M. Müller, S. Gelder, S. Geprägs, M. Opel, M. Weiler, K. Sethupathi,
H. Huebl, R. Gross, M.S. Ramachandra Rao, M. Althammer, Effect of interfacial
oxidation layer in spin pumping experiments on Ni80Fe20/SrIrO3 heterostructures,
Journal of Applied Physics 128, 083903 (2020).
• G. Terrasanta, M. Müller, T. Sommer, S. Geprägs, R. Gross, M. Althammer,
M. Poot, Growth of aluminum nitride on a silicon nitride substrate for hybrid
photonic circuits, Materials for Quantum Technology 1, 021002 (2021).
• J. Gückelhorn, T. Wimmer, M. Müller, S. Geprägs, H. Huebl, R. Gross,
M. Althammer, Magnon transport in Y3Fe5O12/Pt nanostructures with reduced
effective magnetization, Physical Review B 104, L180410 (2021).
• L. Flacke, V. Ahrens, S. Mendisch, L. Körber, T. Böttcher, E. Meidinger,
M. Yaqoob, M. Müller, L. Liensberger, A. Kákay, M. Becherer, P. Pirro, M. Althammer, S. Geprägs, H. Huebl, R. Gross, M. Weiler, Robust formation of
nanoscale magnetic skyrmions in easy-plane anisotropy thin film multilayers with
low damping, Physical Review B 104, L100417 (2021).
• G. Terrasanta, T. Sommer, M. Müller, M. Althammer, R. Gross, M. Poot,
Aluminum nitride integration on silicon nitride photonic circuits: a hybrid approach
towards on-chip nonlinear optics, Optics Express 30, 8537 (2022).
• R. Flaschmann, C. Schmid, L. Zugliani, S. Strohauer, F. Wietschorke, S. Grotowski, B. Jonas, M. Müller, M. Althammer, R. Gross, J.J. Finley, K. Müller,
Optimizing the growth conditions of Al mirrors for superconducting nanowire
single-photon detectors, Materials for Quantum Technology 3, 035002 (2023).
• S. Strohauer, F. Wietschorke, L. Zugliani, R. Flaschmann, C. Schmid, S. Grotowski, M. Müller, B. Jonas, M. Althammer, R. Gross, K. Müller, J.J. Finley,
Site-Selective Enhancement of Superconducting Nanowire Single-Photon Detectors
via Local Helium Ion Irradiation, Advanced Quantum Technologies 6, 2300139
(2023)

188

Bibliography
[1] M.M. Waldrop, The chips are down for Moore’s law, Nature 530, 144 (2016).
[2] J. Nathawat, K.K.H. Smithe, C.D. English, S. Yin, R. Dixit, M. Randle,
N. Arabchigavkani, B. Barut, K. He, E. Pop, J.P. Bird, Transient hot-carrier
dynamics and intrinsic velocity saturation in monolayer MoS2, Physical Review
Materials 4, 014002 (2020).
[3] S. Das, A. Sebastian, E. Pop, C.J. McClellan, A.D. Franklin, T. Grasser,
T. Knobloch, Y. Illarionov, A.V. Penumatcha, J. Appenzeller, Z. Chen, W. Zhu,
I. Asselberghs, L.J. Li, U.E. Avci, N. Bhat, T.D. Anthopoulos, R. Singh, Transistors based on two-dimensional materials for future integrated circuits, Nature
Electronics 4, 786 (2021).
[4] W. Lu, P. Xie, C.M. Lieber, Nanowire Transistor Performance Limits and Applications, IEEE Transactions on Electron Devices 55, 2859 (2008).
[5] J.P. Colinge, C.W. Lee, A. Afzalian, N.D. Akhavan, R. Yan, I. Ferain, P. Razavi,
B. O’Neill, A. Blake, M. White, A.M. Kelleher, B. McCarthy, R. Murphy,
Nanowire transistors without junctions, Nature Nanotechnology 5, 225 (2010).
[6] A.M. Ionescu, H. Riel, Tunnel field-effect transistors as energy-efficient electronic
switches, Nature 479, 329 (2011).
[7] K.R.N. Karthik, C.K. Pandey, A Review of Tunnel Field-Effect Transistors for
Improved ON-State Behaviour, Silicon 15, 1 (2023).
[8] K. Amsalu, S. Palani, A review on photonics and its applications, Materials
Today: Proceedings 33, 3372 (2020).
[9] I. Amiri, S. Azzuhri, M. Jalil, H. Hairi, J. Ali, M. Bunruangses, P. Yupapin, Introduction to Photonics: Principles and the Most Recent Applications of
Microstructures, Micromachines 9, 452 (2018).
[10] N. Jiang, X. Zhuo, J. Wang, Active Plasmonics: Principles, Structures, and
Applications, Chemical Reviews 118, 3054 (2018).
[11] T.W. Odom, G.C. Schatz, Introduction to Plasmonics, Chemical Reviews 111,
3667 (2011).

189

[12] T. Liew, I. Shelykh, G. Malpuech, Polaritonic devices, Physica E: Lowdimensional Systems and Nanostructures 43, 1543 (2011).
[13] W. Binasch, G. and Grünberg, P. and Saurenbach, F. and Zinn, Enhanced
magnetoresistance in layered magnetic structures with antiferromagnetic interlayer
exchange, Physical Review B 39, 4828 (1989).
[14] M.N. Baibich, J.M. Broto, A. Fert, F.N. Van Dau, F. Petroff, P. Eitenne,
G. Creuzet, A. Friederich, J. Chazelas, [Nanoscale Combination] Giant magnetoresistance of (001)Fe/(001)Cr magnetic superlattices, Physical Review Letters
61, 2472 (1988).
[15] A. Fert, Nobel Lecture: Origin, development, and future of spintronics, Reviews
of Modern Physics 80, 1517 (2008).
[16] S. Bhatti, R. Sbiaa, A. Hirohata, H. Ohno, S. Fukami, S. Piramanayagam,
Spintronics based random access memory: a review, Materials Today 20, 530
(2017).
[17] H.S.P. Wong, S. Salahuddin, Memory leads the way to better computing, Nature
Nanotechnology 10, 191 (2015).
[18] J. Åkerman, Toward a Universal Memory, Science 308, 508 (2005).
[19] J. von Neumann, First draft of a report on the EDVAC, IEEE Annals of the
History of Computing 15, 27 (1993).
[20] Q.F. Ou, B.S. Xiong, L. Yu, J. Wen, L. Wang, Y. Tong, In-Memory Logic
Operations and Neuromorphic Computing in Non-Volatile Random Access Memory,
Materials 13, 3532 (2020).
[21] A. Hirohata, K. Yamada, Y. Nakatani, I.L. Prejbeanu, B. Diény, P. Pirro,
B. Hillebrands, Review on spintronics: Principles and device applications, Journal
of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 509, 166711 (2020).
[22] S. Parkin, S.H. Yang, Memory on the racetrack, Nature Nanotechnology 10,
195 (2015).
[23] A. Hirohata, K. Takanashi, Future perspectives for spintronic devices, Journal of
Physics D: Applied Physics 47, 193001 (2014).
[24] S.S.P. Parkin, M. Hayashi, L. Thomas, Magnetic Domain-Wall Racetrack Memory, Science 320, 190 (2008).
[25] A.V. Chumak, V.I. Vasyuchka, A.A. Serga, B. Hillebrands, Magnon spintronics,
Nature Physics 11, 453 (2015).
[26] A.V. Chumak, A.A. Serga, B. Hillebrands, Magnonic crystals for data processing,
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 50, 244001 (2017).

190

[27] A.V. Chumak, P. Kabos, M. Wu, C. Abert, C. Adelmann, A.O. Adeyeye, J. Akerman, F.G. Aliev, A. Anane, A. Awad, C.H. Back, A. Barman,
G.E.W. Bauer, M. Becherer, E.N. Beginin, V.A.S.V. Bittencourt, Y.M. Blanter,
P. Bortolotti, I. Boventer, D.A. Bozhko, S.A. Bunyaev, J.J. Carmiggelt, R.R.
Cheenikundil, F. Ciubotaru, S. Cotofana, G. Csaba, O.V. Dobrovolskiy,
C. Dubs, M. Elyasi, K.G. Fripp, H. Fulara, I.A. Golovchanskiy, C. GonzalezBallestero, P. Graczyk, D. Grundler, P. Gruszecki, G. Gubbiotti, K. Guslienko,
A. Haldar, S. Hamdioui, R. Hertel, B. Hillebrands, T. Hioki, A. Houshang,
C.M. Hu, H. Huebl, M. Huth, E. Iacocca, M.B. Jungfleisch, G.N. Kakazei,
A. Khitun, R. Khymyn, T. Kikkawa, M. Klaui, O. Klein, J.W. Klos, S. Knauer,
S. Koraltan, M. Kostylev, M. Krawczyk, I.N. Krivorotov, V.V. Kruglyak,
D. Lachance-Quirion, S. Ladak, R. Lebrun, Y. Li, M. Lindner, R. Macedo,
S. Mayr, G.A. Melkov, S. Mieszczak, Y. Nakamura, H.T. Nembach, A.A.
Nikitin, S.A. Nikitov, V. Novosad, J.A. Otalora, Y. Otani, A. Papp, B. Pigeau,
P. Pirro, W. Porod, F. Porrati, H. Qin, B. Rana, T. Reimann, F. Riente,
O. Romero-Isart, A. Ross, A.V. Sadovnikov, A.R. Safin, E. Saitoh, G. Schmidt,
H. Schultheiss, K. Schultheiss, A.A. Serga, S. Sharma, J.M. Shaw, D. Suess,
O. Surzhenko, K. Szulc, T. Taniguchi, M. Urbanek, K. Usami, A.B. Ustinov,
T. van der Sar, S. van Dijken, V.I. Vasyuchka, R. Verba, S.V. Kusminskiy,
Q. Wang, M. Weides, M. Weiler, S. Wintz, S.P. Wolski, X. Zhang, Advances in
Magnetics Roadmap on Spin-Wave Computing, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics
58, 0800172 (2022).
[28] A. Mahmoud, F. Ciubotaru, F. Vanderveken, A.V. Chumak, S. Hamdioui,
C. Adelmann, S. Cotofana, Introduction to spin wave computing, Journal of
Applied Physics 128, 161101 (2020).
[29] K. Zakeri, Terahertz magnonics: Feasibility of using terahertz magnons for information processing, Physica C: Superconductivity and its Applications 549,
164 (2018).
[30] L. Liensberger, Magnon hybrid dynamics, PhD Thesis (2021).
[31] A.V. Chumak, A.A. Serga, B. Hillebrands, Magnon transistor for all-magnon
data processing, Nature Communications 5, 4700 (2014).
[32] A. Khitun, M. Bao, K.L. Wang, Magnonic logic circuits, Journal of Physics D:
Applied Physics 43, 264005 (2010).
[33] N. Sato, K. Sekiguchi, Y. Nozaki, Electrical Demonstration of Spin-Wave Logic
Operation, Applied Physics Express 6, 063001 (2013).
[34] F. Freimuth, S. Blügel, Y. Mokrousov, Direct and inverse spin-orbit torques,
Physical Review B 92, 064415 (2015).

191

[35] J. Sinova, S.O. Valenzuela, J. Wunderlich, C.H. Back, T. Jungwirth, Spin Hall
effects, Reviews of Modern Physics 87, 1213 (2015).
[36] P.M. Haney, H.W. Lee, K.J. Lee, A. Manchon, M.D. Stiles, Current induced
torques and interfacial spin-orbit coupling: Semiclassical modeling, Physical
Review B 87, 174411 (2013).
[37] Y.A. Bychkov, É.I. Rashba, Properties of a 2D electron gas with a lifted spectral
degeneracy, JETP Letters 39, 78 (1984).
[38] V. Edelstein, Spin polarization of conduction electrons induced by electric current
in two-dimensional asymmetric electron systems, Solid State Communications
73, 233 (1990).
[39] I.M. Miron, K. Garello, G. Gaudin, P.J. Zermatten, M.V. Costache, S. Auffret,
S. Bandiera, B. Rodmacq, A. Schuhl, P. Gambardella, Perpendicular switching
of a single ferromagnetic layer induced by in-plane current injection, Nature 476,
189 (2011).
[40] A.J. Berger, E.R.J. Edwards, H.T. Nembach, O. Karis, M. Weiler, T.J. Silva,
Determination of the spin Hall effect and the spin diffusion length of Pt from
self-consistent fitting of damping enhancement and inverse spin-orbit torque measurements, Physical Review B 98, 024402 (2018).
[41] K. Garello, I.M. Miron, C.O. Avci, F. Freimuth, Y. Mokrousov, S. Blügel,
S. Auffret, O. Boulle, G. Gaudin, P. Gambardella, Symmetry and magnitude of
spin–orbit torques in ferromagnetic heterostructures, Nature Nanotechnology 8,
587 (2013).
[42] A.J. Berger, E.R.J. Edwards, H.T. Nembach, A.D. Karenowska, M. Weiler, T.J.
Silva, Inductive detection of fieldlike and dampinglike ac inverse spin-orbit torques
in ferromagnet/normal-metal bilayers, Physical Review B 97, 94407 (2018).
[43] A. Hoffmann, Spin Hall Effects in Metals, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 49,
5172 (2013).
[44] L. Liu, C.F. Pai, Y. Li, H.W. Tseng, D.C. Ralph, R.A. Buhrman, Spin-Torque
Switching with the Giant Spin Hall Effect of Tantalum, Science 336, 555 (2012).
[45] A. Manchon, J. Železný, I.M. Miron, T. Jungwirth, J. Sinova, A. Thiaville,
K. Garello, P. Gambardella, Current-induced spin-orbit torques in ferromagnetic
and antiferromagnetic systems, Reviews of Modern Physics 91, 035004 (2019).
[46] C. Song, R. Zhang, L. Liao, Y. Zhou, X. Zhou, R. Chen, Y. You, X. Chen,
F. Pan, Spin-orbit torques: Materials, mechanisms, performances, and potential
applications, Progress in Materials Science 118, 100761 (2021).

192

[47] T. Wakamura, H. Akaike, Y. Omori, Y. Niimi, S. Takahashi, A. Fujimaki,
S. Maekawa, Y. Otani, Quasiparticle-mediated spin Hall effect in a superconductor,
Nature Materials 14, 675 (2015).
[48] M. Umeda, Y. Shiomi, T. Kikkawa, T. Niizeki, J. Lustikova, S. Takahashi,
E. Saitoh, Spin-current coherence peak in superconductor/magnet junctions, Applied Physics Letters 112, 232601 (2018).
[49] K.R. Jeon, C. Ciccarelli, A.J. Ferguson, H. Kurebayashi, L.F. Cohen, X. Montiel, M. Eschrig, J.W.A. Robinson, M.G. Blamire, Enhanced spin pumping into
superconductors provides evidence for superconducting pure spin currents, Nature
Materials 17, 499 (2018).
[50] K.R. Jeon, J.C. Jeon, X. Zhou, A. Migliorini, J. Yoon, S.S.P. Parkin, Giant
Transition-State Quasiparticle Spin-Hall Effect in an Exchange-Spin-Split Superconductor Detected by Nonlocal Magnon Spin Transport, ACS Nano 14, 15874
(2020).
[51] S. Sharma, B.Z. Rameshti, Y.M. Blanter, G.E.W. Bauer, Optimal mode matching
in cavity optomagnonics, Physical Review B 99, 214423 (2019).
[52] S. Viola Kusminskiy, H.X. Tang, F. Marquardt, Coupled spin-light dynamics in
cavity optomagnonics, Physical Review A 94, 033821 (2016).
[53] J. Graf, S. Sharma, H. Huebl, S.V. Kusminskiy, Design of an optomagnonic crystal: Towards optimal magnon-photon mode matching at the microscale, Physical
Review Research 3, 013277 (2021).
[54] J. Graf, H. Pfeifer, F. Marquardt, S. Viola Kusminskiy, Cavity optomagnonics
with magnetic textures: Coupling a magnetic vortex to light, Physical Review B
98, 241406 (2018).
[55] M. Weiler, L. Dreher, C. Heeg, H. Huebl, R. Gross, M.S. Brandt, S.T.B.
Goennenwein, Elastically Driven Ferromagnetic Resonance in Nickel Thin Films,
Physical Review Letters 106, 117601 (2011).
[56] M. Weiler, H. Huebl, F.S. Goerg, F.D. Czeschka, R. Gross, S.T.B. Goennenwein, Spin Pumping with Coherent Elastic Waves, Physical Review Letters 108,
176601 (2012).
[57] P.G. Gowtham, G.M. Stiehl, D.C. Ralph, R.A. Buhrman, Thickness-dependent
magnetoelasticity and its effects on perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in Ta/CoFeB/MgO thin films, Physical Review B 93, 024404 (2016).
[58] M. Küß, M. Heigl, L. Flacke, A. Hörner, M. Weiler, M. Albrecht, A. Wixforth,
Nonreciprocal Dzyaloshinskii–Moriya Magnetoacoustic Waves, Physical Review
Letters 125, 217203 (2020).

193

[59] M. Küß, M. Heigl, L. Flacke, A. Hefele, A. Hörner, M. Weiler, M. Albrecht,
A. Wixforth, Symmetry of the Magnetoelastic Interaction of Rayleigh and Shear
Horizontal Magnetoacoustic Waves in Nickel Thin Films on LiTaO3 , Physical
Review Applied 15, 034046 (2021).
[60] M. Küß, M. Heigl, L. Flacke, A. Hörner, M. Weiler, A. Wixforth, M. Albrecht,
Nonreciprocal Magnetoacoustic Waves in Dipolar-Coupled Ferromagnetic Bilayers,
Physical Review Applied 15, 034060 (2021).
[61] T. Kikkawa, K. Shen, B. Flebus, R.A. Duine, K.i. Uchida, Z. Qiu, G.E. Bauer,
E. Saitoh, Magnon Polarons in the Spin Seebeck Effect, Physical Review Letters
117, 207203 (2016).
[62] Y. Hashimoto, T.H. Johansen, E. Saitoh, 180°-Phase Shift of Magnetoelastic
Waves Observed By Phase-Resolved Spin-Wave Tomography, Applied Physics
Letters 112 (2018).
[63] X. Zhang, A. Galda, X. Han, D. Jin, V.M. Vinokur, Broadband Nonreciprocity Enabled by Strong Coupling of Magnons and Microwave Photons, Physical
Review Applied 13, 044039 (2020).
[64] D. Hatanaka, M. Asano, H. Okamoto, Y. Kunihashi, H. Sanada, H. Yamaguchi, On-Chip Coherent Transduction between Magnons and Acoustic Phonons
in Cavity Magnomechanics, Physical Review Applied 17, 034024 (2022).
[65] L. Liensberger, F.X. Haslbeck, A. Bauer, H. Berger, R. Gross, H. Huebl,
C. Pfleiderer, M. Weiler, Tunable cooperativity in coupled spin-cavity systems,
Physical Review B 104, L100415 (2021).
[66] C. Lüthi, L. Flacke, A. Aqeel, A. Kamra, R. Gross, C. Back, M. Weiler, Hybrid
magnetization dynamics in Cu2OSeO3 /NiFe heterostructures, Applied Physics
Letters 122, 012401 (2023).
[67] M. Müller, M. Scheufele, J. Gückelhorn, L. Flacke, M. Weiler, H. Huebl,
S. Gepraegs, R. Gross, M. Althammer, Reduced effective magnetization and
damping by slowly relaxing impurities in strained γ -Fe2O3 thin films, Journal of
Applied Physics 132, 233905 (2022).
[68] M. Müller, L. Liensberger, L. Flacke, H. Huebl, A. Kamra, W. Belzig, R. Gross,
M. Weiler, M. Althammer, Temperature-Dependent Spin Transport and CurrentInduced Torques in Superconductor-Ferromagnet Heterostructures, Physical Review Letters 126, 087201 (2021).
[69] M. Müller, R. Hoepfl, L. Liensberger, S. Geprägs, H. Huebl, M. Weiler,
R. Gross, M. Althammer, Growth optimization of TaN for superconducting
spintronics, Materials for Quantum Technology 1, 045001 (2021).

194

[70] M. Müller, T. Luschmann, A. Faltermeier, S. Weichselbaumer, L. Koch, G.B.P.
Huber, H.W. Schumacher, N. Ubbelohde, D. Reifert, T. Scheller, F. Deppe,
A. Marx, S. Filipp, M. Althammer, R. Gross, H. Huebl, Magnetic field robust
high quality factor NbTiN superconducting microwave resonators, Materials for
Quantum Technology 2, 015002 (2022).
[71] M. Müller, J. Weber, F. Engelhardt, V.A.S.V. Bittencourt, T. Luschmann,
M. Cherkasskii, S.T.B. Goennenwein, S.V. Kusminskiy, S. Gepraegs, R. Gross,
M. Althammer, H. Huebl, Chiral phonons and phononic birefringence in ferromagnetic metal - bulk acoustic resonator hybrids, arxiv 2303.08429 (2023).
[72] D. Polder, On the theory of ferromagnetic resonance, Physica 15, 253 (1949).
[73] C. Kittel, On the Theory of Ferromagnetic Resonance Absorption, Physical Review
73, 155 (1948).
[74] A. Gurevich, G. Melkov, Magnetization Oscillations and Waves, Taylor &
Francis (1996).
[75] D.D. Stancil, A. Prabhakar, Spin Waves, Springer US, Boston, MA (2009).
[76] B. Lax, K.J. Button, H.J. Hagger, Microwave Ferrites and Ferrimagnetics, Physics
Today 16, 57 (1963).
[77] K. An, A.N. Litvinenko, R. Kohno, A.A. Fuad, V.V. Naletov, L. Vila, U. Ebels,
G. de Loubens, H. Hurdequint, N. Beaulieu, J. Ben Youssef, N. Vukadinovic,
G.E.W. Bauer, A.N. Slavin, V.S. Tiberkevich, O. Klein, Coherent long-range
transfer of angular momentum between magnon Kittel modes by phonons, Physical
Review B 101, 060407 (2020).
[78] H. Huebl, C.W. Zollitsch, J. Lotze, F. Hocke, M. Greifenstein, A. Marx,
R. Gross, S.T.B. Goennenwein, High Cooperativity in Coupled Microwave Resonator Ferrimagnetic Insulator Hybrids, Physical Review Letters 111, 127003
(2013).
[79] Y. Li, T. Polakovic, Y.L. Wang, J. Xu, S. Lendinez, Z. Zhang, J. Ding, T. Khaire,
H. Saglam, R. Divan, J. Pearson, W.K. Kwok, Z. Xiao, V. Novosad, A. Hoffmann, W. Zhang, Strong Coupling between Magnons and Microwave Photons
in On-Chip Ferromagnet-Superconductor Thin-Film Devices, Physical Review
Letters 123, 107701 (2019).
[80] J.T. Hou, L. Liu, Strong Coupling between Microwave Photons and Nanomagnet
Magnons, Physical Review Letters 123, 107702 (2019).
[81] S. Kosen, Microwave Magnonics at Millikelvin Temperatures, PhD Thesis (2019).

195

[82] H.T. Nembach, T.J. Silva, J.M. Shaw, M.L. Schneider, M.J. Carey, S. Maat, J.R.
Childress, Perpendicular ferromagnetic resonance measurements of damping and
Lande g-factor in sputtered (Co2 Mn)1−x Gex thin films, Physical Review B 84,
054424 (2011).
[83] M. Weiler, Magnetization dynamics and spin torques in exchange-coupled spin
systems, Habilitation Thesis (2020).
[84] A.J. Berger, E.R. Edwards, H.T. Nembach, A.D. Karenowska, M. Weiler, T.J.
Silva, Inductive detection of fieldlike and dampinglike ac inverse spin-orbit torques
in ferromagnet/normal-metal bilayers, Physical Review B 97, 94407 (2018).
[85] Y. Tserkovnyak, A. Brataas, G.E.W. Bauer, Spin pumping and magnetization
dynamics in metallic multilayers, Physical Review B 66, 224403 (2002).
[86] R. Gross, A. Marx, Festkörperphysik, De Gruyter Oldenbourg, Berlin, Boston
(2022).
[87] W. Pauli, Über den Zusammenhang des Abschlusses der Elektronengruppen im
Atom mit der Komplexstruktur der Spektren, Zeitschrift für Physik 31, 765
(1925).
[88] F. Hund, Zur Deutung der Molekelspektren. I, Zeitschrift für Physik 40, 742
(1927).
[89] W. Heisenberg, Mehrkörperproblem und Resonanz in der Quantenmechanik,
Zeitschrift für Physik 38, 411 (1926).
[90] R. O’Handley, Modern Magnetic Materials: Principles and Applications, Wiley
(1999).
[91] M. Planck, Ueber das Gesetz der Energieverteilung im Normalspectrum, Annalen
der Physik 309, 553 (1901).
[92] L. Flacke, Spin-wave transport and skyrmion formation in CoFe-based thin film
heterostructures, PhD Thesis (2021).
[93] A. Landé, Über den anomalen Zeemaneffekt, in Selected Scientific Papers of Alfred
Landé, 156–158, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht (1988).
[94] R. Shankar, Principles of Quantum Mechanics, Springer-Verlag New York
(1994).
[95] J.M.D. Coey, Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, Cambridge University Press
(2001).
[96] L. Dreher, M. Weiler, M. Pernpeintner, H. Huebl, R. Gross, M.S. Brandt,
S.T.B. Goennenwein, Surface acoustic wave driven ferromagnetic resonance in
nickel thin films: Theory and experiment, Physical Review B 86, 134415 (2012).

196

[97] B. Lax, K. Button, Microwave Ferrites and Ferrimagnetics, Lincoln Laboratory
publications, McGraw-Hill (1962).
[98] T. Miyazaki, H. Jin, The Physics of Ferromagnetism, Vol. 158 von Springer Series
in Materials Science, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2012).
[99] J.A. Osborn, Demagnetizing Factors of the General Ellipsoid, Physical Review
67, 351 (1945).
[100] A. Gurevich, G. Melkov, Magnetization Oscillations and Waves, CRC Press
(2020).
[101] J.G. Gay, R. Richter, Spin anisotropy of ferromagnetic films, Physical Review
Letters 56, 2728 (1986).
[102] C. Chappert, K.L. Dang, P. Beauvillain, H. Hurdequint, D. Renard, Ferromagnetic resonance studies of very thin cobalt films on a gold substrate, Physical
Review B 34, 3192 (1986).
[103] P.F. Carcia, Perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in Pd/Co and Pt/Co thin-film
layered structures, Journal of Applied Physics 63, 5066 (1988).
[104] M. Wolloch, D. Suess, Strain-induced control of magnetocrystalline anisotropy
energy in FeCo thin films, Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials 522,
167542 (2021).
[105] L. Flacke, V. Ahrens, S. Mendisch, L. Körber, T. Böttcher, E. Meidinger,
M. Yaqoob, M. Müller, L. Liensberger, A. Kákay, M. Becherer, P. Pirro,
M. Althammer, S. Geprägs, H. Huebl, R. Gross, M. Weiler, Robust formation
of nanoscale magnetic skyrmions in easy-plane anisotropy thin film multilayers
with low damping, Physical Review B 104, L100417 (2021).
[106] J. Gückelhorn, T. Wimmer, M. Müller, S. Geprägs, H. Huebl, R. Gross,
M. Althammer, Magnon transport in Y3Fe5O12/Pt nanostructures with reduced
effective magnetization, Physical Review B 104, L180410 (2021).
[107] G.H.O. Daalderop, P.J. Kelly, F.J.A. den Broeder, Prediction and confirmation of
perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in Co/Ni multilayers, Physical Review Letters
68, 682 (1992).
[108] F. Gimbert, L. Calmels, First-principles investigation of the magnetic anisotropy
and magnetic properties of Co/Ni(111) superlattices, Physical Review B 86,
184407 (2012).
[109] L. Landau, E. Lifshitz, On the theory of the dispersion of magnetic permeability
in ferromagnetic bodies, in Perspectives in Theoretical Physics, 51–65, Elsevier
(1992).

197

[110] W.K. Peria, X. Wang, H. Yu, S. Lee, I. Takeuchi, P.A. Crowell, Magnetoelastic
Gilbert damping in magnetostrictive Fe0.7 Ga0.3 thin films, Physical Review B
103, L220403 (2021).
[111] H. Suhl, Theory of the magnetic damping constant, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 34, 1834 (1998).
[112] S. Streib, H. Keshtgar, G.E. Bauer, Damping of Magnetization Dynamics by
Phonon Pumping, Physical Review Letters 121, 027202 (2018).
[113] E. Rossi, O.G. Heinonen, A.H. MacDonald, Dynamics of magnetization coupled
to a thermal bath of elastic modes, Physical Review B 72, 174412 (2005).
[114] M.J. Hurben, C.E. Patton, Theory of two magnon scattering microwave relaxation
and ferromagnetic resonance linewidth in magnetic thin films, Journal of Applied
Physics 83, 4344 (1998).
[115] S. Yoshii, K. Kato, E. Shigematsu, R. Ohshima, Y. Ando, K. Usami, M. Shiraishi, Significant suppression of two-magnon scattering in ultrathin Co by controlling the surface magnetic anisotropy at the Co/nonmagnet interfaces, Physical
Review B 106, 174414 (2022).
[116] L. Zhu, D.C. Ralph, R.A. Buhrman, Effective Spin-Mixing Conductance of
Heavy-Metal-Ferromagnet Interfaces, Physical Review Letters 123, 57203 (2019).
[117] K. Gilmore, Y.U. Idzerda, M.D. Stiles, Identification of the Dominant PrecessionDamping Mechanism in Fe, Co, and Ni by First-Principles Calculations, Physical
Review Letters 99, 027204 (2007).
[118] Z. Xu, K. Zhang, J. Li, Disentangling intrinsic and extrinsic Gilbert damping,
Physical Review B 104, 224404 (2021).
[119] T. Gilbert, Classics in Magnetics A Phenomenological Theory of Damping in
Ferromagnetic Materials, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 40, 3443 (2004).
[120] L. Liensberger, Spin-Orbit Torques and Magnetization Dynamics in Non-collinear
Magnets, Master’s Thesis (2017).
[121] L. Flacke, Spin-Pumping and Spin Wave Damping in Co25 Fe75 Thin-Film Heterostructures, Master’s Thesis (2018).
[122] M. Müller, Superconductor/Ferromagnet Heterostructures for Superconducting
Spintronics, Master’s Thesis (2020).
[123] J.A.C. Bland, B. Heinrich (Eds.), Ultrathin Magnetic Structures III, SpringerVerlag, Berlin/Heidelberg (2005).

198

[124] W. Bailey, P. Kabos, F. Mancoff, S. Russek, Control of magnetization dynamics
in Ni81Fe19 thin films through the use of rare-earth dopants, IEEE Transactions
on Magnetics 37, 1749 (2001).
[125] J. Rantschler, B. Mar, J. Mallett, P. Chen, R. McMichael, W. Egelhoff, Damping
at normal metal/permalloy interfaces, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 41, 3523
(2005).
[126] J.M. Beaujour, D. Ravelosona, I. Tudosa, E.E. Fullerton, A.D. Kent, Ferromagnetic resonance linewidth in ultrathin films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy,
Physical Review B 80, 180415 (2009).
[127] M. Obstbaum, M. Härtinger, H.G. Bauer, T. Meier, F. Swientek, C.H. Back,
G. Woltersdorf, Inverse spin Hall effect in Ni81Fe19 /normal-metal bilayers, Physical Review B 89, 060407 (2014).
[128] E. Saitoh, M. Ueda, H. Miyajima, G. Tatara, Conversion of spin current into
charge current at room temperature: Inverse spin-Hall effect, Applied Physics
Letters 88, 182509 (2006).
[129] A. Soumyanarayanan, N. Reyren, A. Fert, C. Panagopoulos, Emergent phenomena induced by spin–orbit coupling at surfaces and interfaces, Nature 539,
509 (2016).
[130] M. Weiler, J.M. Shaw, H.T. Nembach, T.J. Silva, Phase-Sensitive Detection of
Spin Pumping via the ac Inverse Spin Hall Effect, Physical Review Letters 113,
157204 (2014).
[131] A. Barman, J. Sinha, Spin Dynamics and Damping in Ferromagnetic Thin Films
and Nanostructures, Springer International Publishing, Springer Cham (2018).
[132] M.A.W. Schoen, J.M. Shaw, H.T. Nembach, M. Weiler, T.J. Silva, Radiative
damping in waveguide-based ferromagnetic resonance measured via analysis of
perpendicular standing spin waves in sputtered permalloy films, Physical Review
B 92, 184417 (2015).
[133] D. Huertas Hernando, Y.V. Nazarov, A. Brataas, G.E.W. Bauer, Conductance modulation by spin precession in noncollinear ferromagnet normal-metal
ferromagnet systems, Physical Review B 62, 5700 (2000).
[134] B. Heinrich, C. Burrowes, E. Montoya, B. Kardasz, E. Girt, Y.Y. Song, Y. Sun,
M. Wu, Spin Pumping at the Magnetic Insulator (YIG)/Normal Metal (Au)
Interfaces, Physical Review Letters 107, 066604 (2011).
[135] L. Flacke, L. Liensberger, M. Althammer, H. Huebl, S. Geprägs,
K. Schultheiss, A. Buzdakov, T. Hula, H. Schultheiss, E.R.J. Edwards, H.T.
Nembach, J.M. Shaw, R. Gross, M. Weiler, High spin-wave propagation length

199

consistent with low damping in a metallic ferromagnet, Applied Physics Letters
115, 122402 (2019).
[136] M. Haertinger, C.H. Back, J. Lotze, M. Weiler, S. Geprägs, H. Huebl, S.T.B.
Goennenwein, G. Woltersdorf, Spin pumping in YIG/Pt bilayers as a function of
layer thickness, Physical Review B 92, 054437 (2015).
[137] T.S. Suraj, M. Müller, S. Gelder, S. Geprägs, M. Opel, M. Weiler, K. Sethupathi, H. Huebl, R. Gross, M.S. Ramachandra Rao, M. Althammer, Effect
of interfacial oxidation layer in spin pumping experiments on Ni80Fe20/SrIrO3
heterostructures, Journal of Applied Physics 128, 083903 (2020).
[138] C. Yu, H. Li, Y. Luo, L. Zhu, Z. Qian, T. Zhou, Thickness-dependent magnetic
order and phase-transition dynamics in epitaxial Fe-rich FeRh thin films, Physics
Letters A 383, 2424 (2019).
[139] C. Lüthi, L. Flacke, A. Aqeel, A. Kamra, R. Gross, C. Back, M. Weiler, Hybrid
magnetization dynamics in Cu2OSeO3/NiFe heterostructures, Applied Physics
Letters 122, 012401 (2023).
[140] H. Maier-Flaig, S. Klingler, C. Dubs, O. Surzhenko, R. Gross, M. Weiler,
H. Huebl, S.T.B. Goennenwein, Temperature-dependent magnetic damping of
yttrium iron garnet spheres, Physical Review B 95, 214423 (2017).
[141] E.G. Spencer, R.C. LeCraw, A.M. Clogston, Low-Temperature Line-Width
Maximum in Yttrium Iron Garnet, Physical Review Letters 3, 32 (1959).
[142] C.L. Jermain, S.V. Aradhya, N.D. Reynolds, R.A. Buhrman, J.T. Brangham,
M.R. Page, P.C. Hammel, F.Y. Yang, D.C. Ralph, Increased low-temperature
damping in yttrium iron garnet thin films, Physical Review B 95, 174411 (2017).
[143] M. Sparks, Ferromagnetic-relaxation Theory, McGraw-Hill advanced physics
monograph series, McGraw-Hill (1964).
[144] J.H. Van Vleck, R. Orbach, Ferrimagnetic Resonance of Dilute Rare-Earth Doped
Iron Garnets, Physical Review Letters 11, 65 (1963).
[145] H. Chen, P. De Gasperis, R. Marcelli, M. Pardavi-Horvath, R. McMichael, P.E.
Wigen, Wide-band linewidth measurements in yttrium iron garnet films, Journal
of Applied Physics 67, 5530 (1990).
[146] G. Woltersdorf, M. Kiessling, G. Meyer, J.U. Thiele, C.H. Back, Damping by
Slow Relaxing Rare Earth Impurities in Ni80Fe20, Physical Review Letters 102,
257602 (2009).
[147] T.S. Hartwick, J. Smit, Ferromagnetic Resonance in Si-Doped YIG, Journal of
Applied Physics 39, 827 (1968).

200

[148] A.M. Clogston, Relaxation Phenomena in Ferrites, Bell System Technical Journal 34, 739 (1955).
[149] X. Zhang, C.L. Zou, L. Jiang, H.X. Tang, Strongly coupled magnons and cavity
microwave photons, Physical Review Letters 113, 156401 (2014).
[150] H. Maier-Flaig, M. Harder, S. Klingler, Z. Qiu, E. Saitoh, M. Weiler,
S. Geprägs, R. Gross, S.T.B. Goennenwein, H. Huebl, Tunable magnon-photon
coupling in a compensating ferrimagnet—from weak to strong coupling, Applied
Physics Letters 110, 132401 (2017).
[151] Y. Li, W. Zhang, V. Tyberkevych, W.K. Kwok, A. Hoffmann, V. Novosad,
Hybrid magnonics: Physics, circuits, and applications for coherent information
processing, Journal of Applied Physics 128, 130902 (2020).
[152] Ö.O. Soykal, M.E. Flatté, Size dependence of strong coupling between nanomagnets and photonic cavities, Physical Review B 82, 104413 (2010).
[153] Ö.O. Soykal, M.E. Flatté, Strong field interactions between a nanomagnet and a
photonic cavity, Physical Review Letters 104, 077202 (2010).
[154] D. Walls, G.J. Milburn (Eds.), Quantum Optics, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin (2008).
[155] J. Zollitsch, Single Excitation Transfer in the Quantum Regime: A Spin-Based
Solid-State Approach, PhD Thesis (2016).
[156] I. Diniz, S. Portolan, R. Ferreira, J.M. Gérard, P. Bertet, A. Auffèves, Strongly
coupling a cavity to inhomogeneous ensembles of emitters: Potential for long-lived
solid-state quantum memories, Physical Review A 84, 063810 (2011).
[157] T. Sato, W. Yu, S. Streib, G.E.W. Bauer, Dynamic magnetoelastic boundary
conditions and the pumping of phonons, Physical Review B 104, 014403 (2021).
[158] K. An, R. Kohno, A.N. Litvinenko, R.L. Seeger, V.V. Naletov, L. Vila,
G. de Loubens, J. Ben Youssef, N. Vukadinovic, G.E.W. Bauer, A.N. Slavin,
V.S. Tiberkevich, O. Klein, Bright and Dark States of Two Distant Macrospins
Strongly Coupled by Phonons, Physical Review X 12, 011060 (2022).
[159] R. Schlitz, L. Siegl, T. Sato, W. Yu, G.E.W. Bauer, H. Huebl, S.T.B. Goennenwein, Magnetization dynamics affected by phonon pumping, Physical Review B
106, 014407 (2022).
[160] K. An, C. Kim, K.W. Moon, R. Kohno, G. Olivetti, G. de Loubens, N. Vukadinovic, J.B. Youssef, C. Hwang, O. Klein, Optimizing the magnon-phonon
cooperativity in planar geometries, arxiv 1–11 (2023).

201

[161] G. Terrasanta, M. Müller, T. Sommer, S. Geprägs, R. Gross, M. Althammer,
M. Poot, Growth of aluminum nitride on a silicon nitride substrate for hybrid
photonic circuits, Materials for Quantum Technology 1, 021002 (2021).
[162] R. Hoepfl, Wachstumsoptimierung supraleitender Tantalnitrid (TaN) -Dünnfilme
für fortgeschrittene Spinelektronik, Bachelor’s Thesis (2020).
[163] R. Hoepfl, Growth optimization and magnetotransport properties of ferromagnetic
insulating gadolinium nitride thin films, Master’s Thesis (2023).
[164] K. Wasa, I. Kanno, H. Kotera, Handbook of Sputter Deposition Technology:
Fundamentals and Applications for Functional Thin Films, Nano-Materials and
MEMS, Elsevier Science (2012).
[165] D. Depla, S. Mahieu (Eds.), Reactive Sputter Deposition, Vol. 109 von Springer
Series in Materials Science, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin (2008).
[166] D. Mattox, Handbook of Physical Vapor Deposition (PVD) Processing, Online
access with subscription: Proquest Ebook Central, Elsevier Science (2014).
[167] A. Anders, Tutorial: Reactive high power impulse magnetron sputtering (RHiPIMS), Journal of Applied Physics 121, 171101 (2017).
[168] G. Betz, W. Husinsky, Modelling of cluster emission from metal surfaces under
ion impact, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 362, 177 (2004).
[169] J.P. Biersack, J.F. Ziegler, The Stopping and Range of Ions in Solids, in Ion
Implantation Techniques, 122–156, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin (1982).
[170] Y. Yamamura, H. Tawara, Energy dependence of ion-induced sputtering yields
from monatomic solids at normal incidence, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data
Tables 62, 149 (1996).
[171] S. Wu, H. Chen, X. Du, Z. Liu, Effect of deposition power and pressure on rate
deposition and resistivity of titanium thin films grown by DC magnetron sputtering,
Spectroscopy Letters 49, 514 (2016).
[172] S. Schiller, G. Beister, W. Sieber, G. Schirmer, E. Hacker, Influence of deposition
parameters on the optical and structural properties of TiO2 films produced by
reactive d.c. plasmatron sputtering, Thin Solid Films 83, 239 (1981).
[173] A. Karpuz, S. Colmekci, H. Kockar, H. Kuru, M. Uckun, Impact of Deposition
Rate on the Structural and Magnetic Properties of Sputtered Ni/Cu Multilayer
Thin Films, Zeitschrift für Naturforschung A 73, 85 (2017).
[174] Z. Ghorannevis, M.T. Hosseinnejad, M. Habibi, P. Golmahdi, Effect of substrate temperature on structural, morphological and optical properties of deposited
Al/ZnO films, Journal of Theoretical and Applied Physics 9, 33 (2015).

202

[175] R. Vidyasagar, S. Kitayama, H. Yoshitomi, T. Kita, T. Sakurai, H. Ohta, Tuning
optical and ferromagnetic properties of thin GdN films by nitrogen-vacancy centers,
The European Physical Journal B 86, 52 (2013).
[176] C. Ndoye, K. Tapily, M. Orlowski, H. Baumgart, D. Gu, Silicidation of Niobium
Deposited on Silicon by Physical Vapor Deposition, Journal of The Electrochemical Society 158, H897 (2011).
[177] F. Schulz, R. Lawitzki, H. Głowiński, F. Lisiecki, N. Träger, P. Kuświk,
E. Goering, G. Schütz, J. Gräfe, Increase of Gilbert damping in Permalloy thin
films due to heat-induced structural changes, Journal of Applied Physics 129,
153903 (2021).
[178] K. Barmak, J. Liu, Impact of deposition rate, underlayers, and substrates on
β-tungsten formation in sputter deposited films, Journal of Vacuum Science &
Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films 35, A1944 (2017).
[179] G.S. Jang, S.M. Ahn, N.M. Hwang, Effects of Sputtering Power, Working
Pressure, and Electric Bias on the Deposition Behavior of Ag Films during DC
Magnetron Sputtering Considering the Generation of Charged Flux, Electronic
Materials Letters 18, 57 (2022).
[180] D.M. Mitin, A.A. Serdobintsev, Effect of scattering of sputtered atoms on the
growth rate of films fabricated by magnetron sputtering, Technical Physics Letters
43, 814 (2017).
[181] C. Priestland, S. Hersee, The effects of pressure on the deposition rate in rf
sputtering processes, Vacuum 22, 103 (1972).
[182] A. Engwall, L. Bayu Aji, A. Baker, S. Shin, J. Bae, S. McCall, J. Moody,
S. Kucheyev, Effect of substrate tilt on sputter-deposited AuTa films, Applied
Surface Science 547, 149010 (2021).
[183] R.C. Raju Nagiri, S.D. Yambem, Q. Lin, P.L. Burn, P. Meredith, Roomtemperature tilted-target sputtering deposition of highly transparent and low sheet
resistance Al doped ZnO electrodes, Journal of Materials Chemistry C 3, 5322
(2015).
[184] D.M. Glowacka, D.J. Goldie, S. Withington, H. Muhammad, G. Yassin, B.K.
Tan, Development of a NbN Deposition Process for Superconducting Quantum
Sensors, arxiv 1401.2292 (2014).
[185] M. Reichert, Hochwertige supraleitende Dünnfilme für fortgeschrittene Spinelektronik, PhD thesis, TUM (2018).
[186] A. Faltermeier, Optimierung supraleitender Schichten aus Niob, Niobnitrid und
Niobtitannitrid für den Einsatz in Mikrowellenresonatoren, Master’s Thesis
(2019).

203

[187] F. Hartz, Herstellung eines Breitband-Messstabs zur Untersuchung ferromagnetischer Resonanz, Bachelor’s thesis, Technical University Munich (2014).
[188] O. Karlqvist, Calculation of the Magnetic Field in the Ferromagnetic Layer of a
Magnetic Drum, Acta polytechnica, Elanders boktr.; H. Lindståhls bokhandel
i distribution (1954).
[189] Z. Ma, D.G. Seiler, Metrology and Diagnostic Techniques for Nanoelectronics,
Jenny Stanford Publishing (2017).
[190] S. Weichselbaumer, Spin dynamics in strongly coupled spin-photon hybrid systems, PhD Thesis (2020).
[191] C. Poole, Electron Spin Resonance: A Comprehensive Treatise on Experimental
Techniques, Dover books on physics, Dover Publications (1996).
[192] H. Wang, C.R. McRae, J. Gao, M.R. Vissers, T. Brecht, A. Dunsworth, D.P.
Pappas, J. Mutus, Materials loss measurements using superconducting microwave
resonators, Review of Scientific Instruments 91, 091101 (2020).
[193] J. Goetz, F. Deppe, M. Haeberlein, F. Wulschner, C.W. Zollitsch, S. Meier,
M. Fischer, P. Eder, E. Xie, K.G. Fedorov, E.P. Menzel, A. Marx, R. Gross,
Loss mechanisms in superconducting thin film microwave resonators, Journal of
Applied Physics 119, 015304 (2016).
[194] D.S. Wisbey, J. Gao, M.R. Vissers, F.C.S. da Silva, J.S. Kline, L. Vale, D.P. Pappas, Effect of metal/substrate interfaces on radio-frequency loss in superconducting
coplanar waveguides, Journal of Applied Physics 108, 093918 (2010).
[195] J. Gao, M. Daal, A. Vayonakis, S. Kumar, J. Zmuidzinas, B. Sadoulet, B.A.
Mazin, P.K. Day, H.G. Leduc, Experimental evidence for a surface distribution of
two-level systems in superconducting lithographed microwave resonators, Applied
Physics Letters 92, 152505 (2008).
[196] J. Wenner, R. Barends, R.C. Bialczak, Y. Chen, J. Kelly, E. Lucero,
M. Mariantoni, A. Megrant, P.J.J. O’Malley, D. Sank, A. Vainsencher,
H. Wang, T.C. White, Y. Yin, J. Zhao, A.N. Cleland, J.M. Martinis, Surface loss simulations of superconducting coplanar waveguide resonators, Applied
Physics Letters 99, 113513 (2011).
[197] M. Göppl, A. Fragner, M. Baur, R. Bianchetti, S. Filipp, J.M. Fink, P.J. Leek,
G. Puebla, L. Steffen, A. Wallraff, Coplanar waveguide resonators for circuit
quantum electrodynamics, Journal of Applied Physics 104, 113904 (2008).
[198] S. Probst, F.B. Song, P.A. Bushev, A.V. Ustinov, M. Weides, Efficient and robust
analysis of complex scattering data under noise in microwave resonators, Review
of Scientific Instruments 86, 024706 (2015).

204

[199] A. Brataas, B. van Wees, O. Klein, G. de Loubens, M. Viret, Spin insulatronics,
Physics Reports 885, 1 (2020).
[200] G.E. Bauer, E. Saitoh, B.J. Van Wees, Spin caloritronics, Nature Materials 11,
391 (2012).
[201] P. Li, T. Liu, H. Chang, A. Kalitsov, W. Zhang, G. Csaba, W. Li, D. Richardson,
A. DeMann, G. Rimal, H. Dey, J.S. Jiang, W. Porod, S.B. Field, J. Tang,
M.C. Marconi, A. Hoffmann, O. Mryasov, M. Wu, Spin–orbit torque-assisted
switching in magnetic insulator thin films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy,
Nature Communications 7, 12688 (2016).
[202] V. Cherepanov, I. Kolokolov, V. L’vov, The saga of YIG: Spectra, thermodynamics,
interaction and relaxation of magnons in a complex magnet, Physics Reports 229,
81 (1993).
[203] H.B. Maier-Flaig, Magnetic resonance of ferrimagnetic insulators, PhD Thesis
(2017).
[204] A.A. Serga, A.V. Chumak, B. Hillebrands, YIG magnonics, Journal of Physics
D: Applied Physics 43, 264002 (2010).
[205] T.S. Seifert, S. Jaiswal, J. Barker, S.T. Weber, I. Razdolski, J. Cramer, O. Gueckstock, S.F. Maehrlein, L. Nadvornik, S. Watanabe, C. Ciccarelli, A. Melnikov,
G. Jakob, M. Münzenberg, S.T.B. Goennenwein, G. Woltersdorf, B. Rethfeld, P.W. Brouwer, M. Wolf, M. Kläui, T. Kampfrath, Femtosecond formation
dynamics of the spin Seebeck effect revealed by terahertz spectroscopy, Nature
Communications 9, 2899 (2018).
[206] A.V. Singh, B. Khodadadi, J.B. Mohammadi, S. Keshavarz, T. Mewes, D.S.
Negi, R. Datta, Z. Galazka, R. Uecker, A. Gupta, Bulk Single Crystal-Like
Structural and Magnetic Characteristics of Epitaxial Spinel Ferrite Thin Films with
Elimination of Antiphase Boundaries, Advanced Materials 29, 1701222 (2017).
[207] S. Emori, B.A. Gray, H. Jeon, J. Peoples, M. Schmitt, K. Mahalingam, M. Hill,
M.E. McConney, M.T. Gray, U.S. Alaan, A.C. Bornstein, P. Shafer, A.T.
N’Diaye, E. Arenholz, G. Haugstad, K. Meng, F. Yang, D. Li, S. Mahat, D.G.
Cahill, P. Dhagat, A. Jander, N.X. Sun, Y. Suzuki, B.M. Howe, Coexistence
of Low Damping and Strong Magnetoelastic Coupling in Epitaxial Spinel Ferrite
Thin Films, Advanced Materials 29, 1701130 (2017).
[208] S. Emori, D. Yi, S. Crossley, J.J. Wisser, P.P. Balakrishnan, B. Khodadadi,
P. Shafer, C. Klewe, A.T. N’Diaye, B.T. Urwin, K. Mahalingam, B.M. Howe,
H.Y. Hwang, E. Arenholz, Y. Suzuki, Ultralow Damping in Nanometer-Thick
Epitaxial Spinel Ferrite Thin Films, Nano Letters 18, 4273 (2018).

205

[209] S. Tang, M.S. Sarker, K. Ma, H. Yamahara, H. Tabata, M. Seki, Efficient spinwave transmission in epitaxial thin films of defect spinel γ-Fe2x Alx O3 , Applied
Physics Letters 119, 082402 (2021).
[210] E.T. Lee, G.E. Jang, C.K. Kim, D.H. Yoon, Fabrication and gas sensing properties of α-Fe2O3 thin film prepared by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition
(PECVD), Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical 77, 221 (2001).
[211] L. Dghoughi, B. Elidrissi, C. Bernède, M. Addou, M.A. Lamrani, M. Regragui, H. Erguig, Physico-chemical, optical and electrochemical properties of iron
oxide thin films prepared by spray pyrolysis, Applied Surface Science 253, 1823
(2006).
[212] K. Garello, C.O. Avci, I.M. Miron, M. Baumgartner, A. Ghosh, S. Auffret,
O. Boulle, G. Gaudin, P. Gambardella, Ultrafast magnetization switching by
spin-orbit torques, Applied Physics Letters 105, 212402 (2014).
[213] A. Fert, V. Cros, J. Sampaio, Skyrmions on the track, Nature Nanotechnology
8, 152 (2013).
[214] B. Divinskiy, H. Merbouche, V.E. Demidov, K.O. Nikolaev, L. Soumah,
D. Gouéré, R. Lebrun, V. Cros, J.B. Youssef, P. Bortolotti, A. Anane, S.O.
Demokritov, Evidence for spin current driven Bose-Einstein condensation of
magnons, Nature Communications 12, 6541 (2021).
[215] M. Evelt, L. Soumah, A. Rinkevich, S. Demokritov, A. Anane, V. Cros, J. Ben
Youssef, G. de Loubens, O. Klein, P. Bortolotti, V. Demidov, Emission of
Coherent Propagating Magnons by Insulator-Based Spin-Orbit-Torque Oscillators,
Physical Review Applied 10, 041002 (2018).
[216] M. Scheufele, Tuning the Amplitude of the Spin Hall Magnetoresistance, Master’s
Thesis (2021).
[217] R. Grau-Crespo, A.Y. Al-Baitai, I. Saadoune, N.H. De Leeuw, Vacancy ordering and electronic structure of γ-Fe2O3 (maghemite): a theoretical investigation,
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 22, 255401 (2010).
[218] J.E. Jørgensen, L. Mosegaard, L.E. Thomsen, T.R. Jensen, J.C. Hanson, Formation of γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles and vacancy ordering: An in situ X-ray powder
diffraction study, Journal of Solid State Chemistry 180, 180 (2007).
[219] M. Coduri, P. Masala, L. Del Bianco, F. Spizzo, D. Ceresoli, C. Castellano,
S. Cappelli, C. Oliva, S. Checchia, M. Allieta, D.V. Szabo, S. Schlabach,
M. Hagelstein, C. Ferrero, M. Scavini, Local Structure and Magnetism of Fe2O3
Maghemite Nanocrystals: The Role of Crystal Dimension, Nanomaterials 10, 867
(2020).

206

[220] R. Zboril, M. Mashlan, D. Petridis, Iron(III) Oxides from Thermal ProcessesSynthesis, Structural and Magnetic Properties, Mössbauer Spectroscopy Characterization, and Applications, Chemistry of Materials 14, 969 (2002).
[221] R. Dronskowski, The Little Maghemite Story: A Classic Functional Material,
Advanced Functional Materials 11, 27 (2001).
[222] X. Huang, Y. Yang, J. Ding, Epitaxial growth of γ-Fe2O3 thin films on MgO
substrates by pulsed laser deposition and their properties, Acta Materialia 61, 548
(2013).
[223] MgO Crystal Structure: Datasheet from “PAULING FILE Multinaries Edition –
2012” in SpringerMaterials, copyright 2016 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg
& Material Phases Data System (MPDS), Switzerland & National Institute
for Materials Science (NIMS), Japan (2012).
[224] D. Chicot, J. Mendoza, A. Zaoui, G. Louis, V. Lepingle, F. Roudet, J. Lesage,
Mechanical properties of magnetite (Fe3O4), hematite (α-Fe2O3) and goethite (αFeO·OH) by instrumented indentation and molecular dynamics analysis, Materials
Chemistry and Physics 129, 862 (2011).
[225] Y. He, L. Zhang, H.W. Xiong, X. Kang, Evolution of lattice defects in nickel
ferrite spinel: Oxygen vacancy and cation substitution, Journal of Alloys and
Compounds 917, 165494 (2022).
[226] L.J. van der Pauw, A method of measuring specific resistivity and Hall effect of
discs of arbitrary shape, in Semiconductor Devices: Pioneering Papers, 174–182,
World Scientific (1991).
[227] F.J. Morin, Magnetic Susceptibility of α-Fe2O3 and α-Fe2O3 with Added Titanium,
Physical Review 78, 819 (1950).
[228] E.J.W. Verwey, Electronic Conduction of Magnetite (Fe3O4) and its Transition
Point at Low Temperatures, Nature 144, 327 (1939).
[229] S. Alraddadi, The Electronic and Magnetic Properties of Ultrathin γ-Fe2O3 Films,
IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering 842, 012012
(2020).
[230] J. Bobo, D. Basso, E. Snoeck, C. Gatel, D. Hrabovsky, J. Gauffier, L. Ressier,
R. Mamy, S. Visnovsky, J. Hamrle, J. Teillet, A. Fert, Magnetic behavior and
role of the antiphase boundaries in Fe3O4 epitaxial films sputtered on MgO (001),
The European Physical Journal B 24, 43 (2001).
[231] P. Lubitz, M. Rubinstein, J.J. Krebs, S.F. Cheng, Frequency and temperature
dependence of ferromagnetic linewidth in exchange biased Permalloy, Journal of
Applied Physics 89, 6901 (2001).

207

[232] R.D. McMichael, C.G. Lee, M.D. Stiles, F.G. Serpa, P.J. Chen, W.F. Egelhoff,
Exchange bias relaxation in CoO-biased films, Journal of Applied Physics 87,
6406 (2000).
[233] I. Knittel, J. Wei, Y. Zhou, S.K. Arora, I.V. Shvets, M. Luysberg, U. Hartmann,
Observation of antiferromagnetic coupling in epitaxial ferrite films, Physical Review B 74, 132406 (2006).
[234] A.V. Ramos, S. Matzen, J.B. Moussy, F. Ott, M. Viret, Artificial antiphase
boundary at the interface of ferrimagnetic spinel bilayers, Physical Review B 79,
014401 (2009).
[235] E.G. Spencer, R.C. LeCraw, R.C. Linares, Low-Temperature Ferromagnetic
Relaxation in Yttrium Iron Garnet, Physical Review 123, 1937 (1961).
[236] P. Hansen, W. Tolksdorf, J. Schuldt, Anisotropy and magnetostriction of
germanium-substituted yttrium iron garnet, Journal of Applied Physics 43,
4740 (1972).
[237] D.J. Epstein, L. Tocci, High temperature resonance losses in silicon-doped Yittriumiron garnet (YIG), Applied Physics Letters 11, 55 (1967).
[238] J.B. Youssef, C. Brosseau, Magnetization damping in two-component metal oxide
micropowder and nanopowder compacts by broadband ferromagnetic resonance
measurements, Physical Review B 74, 214413 (2006).
[239] R. Comstock, Magnetoelastic coupling constants of the ferrites and garnets, Proceedings of the IEEE 53, 1508 (1965).
[240] E. Popova, N. Keller, F. Gendron, L. Thomas, M.C. Brianso, M. Guyot,
M. Tessier, S.S.P. Parkin, Perpendicular magnetic anisotropy in ultrathin yttrium
iron garnet films prepared by pulsed laser deposition technique, Journal of Vacuum
Science & Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces, and Films 19, 2567 (2001).
[241] M. Takeda, T. Onishi, S. Nakakubo, S. Fujimoto, Physical properties of ironoxide scales on Si-containing steels at high temperature, Materials Transactions
50, 2242 (2009).
[242] O. Madelung, U. Rössler, M. Schulz (Eds.), II-VI and I-VII Compounds; Semimagnetic Compounds, Vol. 41B von Landolt-Börnstein - Group III Condensed
Matter, Springer-Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg (1999).
[243] D. Overview, Part A, Vol. 4a von Landolt-Börnstein - Group III Condensed
Matter, Springer-Verlag, Berlin/Heidelberg (1970).
[244] A.B. Drovosekov, N.M. Kreines, A.S. Barkalova, S.N. Nikolaev, A.V. Sitnikov,
V.V. Rylkov, Effect of Slow Ion Relaxation at Ferromagnetic Resonance in a CoFeBLiNbO Metal-Insulator Nanocomposite, JETP Letters 112, 84 (2020).

208

[245] B.H. Clarke, K. Tweedale, R.W. Teale, Rare-Earth Ion Relaxation Time and G
Tensor in Rare-Earth-Doped Yttrium Iron Garnet. I. Ytterbium, Physical Review
139, A1933 (1965).
[246] P. Hansen, J. Schuldt, W. Tolksdorf, Anisotropy and Magnetostriction of IridiumSubstituted Yttrium Iron Garnet, Physical Review B 8, 4274 (1973).
[247] B.H. Clarke, Rare-earth ion relaxation time and G tensor in rare-earth-doped
yttrium iron garnet. II. Neodymium, Physical Review 139, A1944 (1965).
[248] T. Kasuya, R.C. LeCraw, Relaxation Mechanisms in Ferromagnetic Resonance,
Physical Review Letters 6, 223 (1961).
[249] M. Sparks, Ferromagnetic-relaxation theory, McGraw-Hill advanced physics
monograph series, McGraw-Hill, New York (1964).
[250] A. Krysztofik, S. Özoğlu, R.D. McMichael, E. Coy, Effect of strain-induced
anisotropy on magnetization dynamics in Y3Fe5O12 films recrystallized on a latticemismatched substrate, Scientific Reports 11, 14011 (2021).
[251] P. Jiménez-Cavero, I. Lucas, A. Anadón, R. Ramos, T. Niizeki, M.H. Aguirre,
P.A. Algarabel, K. Uchida, M.R. Ibarra, E. Saitoh, L. Morellón, Spin Seebeck
effect in insulating epitaxial γFe2O3 thin films, APL Materials 5, 026103 (2017).
[252] Y. Tabuchi, S. Ishino, A. Noguchi, T. Ishikawa, R. Yamazaki, K. Usami,
Y. Nakamura, Coherent coupling between a ferromagnetic magnon and a superconducting qubit, Science 349, 405 (2015).
[253] M. Giraldo, Q.N. Meier, A. Bortis, D. Nowak, N.A. Spaldin, M. Fiebig, M.C.
Weber, T. Lottermoser, Magnetoelectric coupling of domains, domain walls and
vortices in a multiferroic with independent magnetic and electric order, Nature
Communications 12, 3093 (2021).
[254] K. Bhoi, H.S. Mohanty, Ravikant, M.F. Abdullah, D.K. Pradhan, S.N. Babu,
A.K. Singh, P.N. Vishwakarma, A. Kumar, R. Thomas, D.K. Pradhan, Unravelling the nature of magneto-electric coupling in room temperature multiferroic
particulate (PbFe0.5 Nb0.5 O3 )–(Co0.6 Zn0.4 Fe1.7 Mn0.3 O4 ) composites, Scientific
Reports 11, 3149 (2021).
[255] V. Risinggård, I. Kulagina, J. Linder, Electric field control of magnon-induced
magnetization dynamics in multiferroics, Scientific Reports 6, 31800 (2016).
[256] C. Bell, S. Milikisyants, M. Huber, J. Aarts, Spin Dynamics in a SuperconductorFerromagnet Proximity System, Physical Review Letters 100, 047002 (2008).
[257] Y. Yao, Q. Song, Y. Takamura, J.P. Cascales, W. Yuan, Y. Ma, Y. Yun, X.C.
Xie, J.S. Moodera, W. Han, Probe of spin dynamics in superconducting NbN thin
films via spin pumping, Physical Review B 97, 224414 (2018).

209

[258] M. Tinkham, Introduction to Superconductivity, Dover Books on Physics Series,
Dover Publications (2004).
[259] J. Annett, Superconductivity, Superfluids and Condensates, Oxford Master Series
in Physics, OUP Oxford (2004).
[260] R. Kleiner, W. Buckel, R. Huebener, Superconductivity: An Introduction, Wiley
(2016).
[261] S. Pittard, P. Feenan, W. Vennart, Superconducting magnets for magnetic resonance imaging, Applied Superconductivity 1, 1827 (1993).
[262] M. Lakrimi, A.M. Thomas, G. Hutton, M. Kruip, R. Slade, P. Davis, A.J.
Johnstone, M.J. Longfield, H. Blakes, S. Calvert, M. Smith, C.A. Marshall,
The principles and evolution of magnetic resonance imaging, Journal of Physics:
Conference Series 286, 012016 (2011).
[263] H. Thomas, A. Marian, A. Chervyakov, S. Stückrad, D. Salmieri, C. Rubbia,
Superconducting transmission lines – Sustainable electric energy transfer with
higher public acceptance?, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 55, 59
(2016).
[264] J. Jin, L. Wang, R. Yang, T. Zhang, S. Mu, Q. Zhou, A composite superconducting energy pipeline and its characteristics, Energy Reports 8, 2072 (2022).
[265] M. Cullinane, F. Judge, M. O’Shea, K. Thandayutham, J. Murphy, Subsea superconductors: The future of offshore renewable energy transmission?, Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Reviews 156, 111943 (2022).
[266] J. Bardeen, L.N. Cooper, J.R. Schrieffer, Theory of Superconductivity, Physical
Review 108, 1175 (1957).
[267] J. Linder, J.W.A. Robinson, Superconducting spintronics, Nature Physics 11,
307 (2015).
[268] G. Yang, C. Ciccarelli, J.W.A. Robinson, Boosting spintronics with superconductivity, APL Materials 9, 050703 (2021).
[269] D. Beckmann, Spin manipulation in nanoscale superconductors, Journal of
Physics Condensed Matter 28, 163001 (2016).
[270] M. Inoue, M. Ichioka, H. Adachi, Spin pumping into superconductors: A new
probe of spin dynamics in a superconducting thin film, Physical Review B 96,
024414 (2017).
[271] T. Kato, Y. Ohnuma, M. Matsuo, J. Rech, T. Jonckheere, T. Martin, Microscopic theory of spin transport at the interface between a superconductor and a
ferromagnetic insulator, Physical Review B 99, 144411 (2019).

210

[272] J.P. Morten, A. Brataas, G.E.W. Bauer, W. Belzig, Y. Tserkovnyak, Proximityeffect–assisted decay of spin currents in superconductors, Europhysics Letters 84,
57008 (2008).
[273] R.S. Keizer, S.T.B. Goennenwein, T.M. Klapwijk, G. Miao, G. Xiao, A. Gupta,
A spin triplet supercurrent through the half-metallic ferromagnet CrO2, Nature
439, 825 (2006).
[274] K.R. Jeon, C. Ciccarelli, H. Kurebayashi, L.F. Cohen, X. Montiel, M. Eschrig,
S. Komori, J.W.A. Robinson, M.G. Blamire, Exchange-field enhancement of
superconducting spin pumping, Physical Review B 99, 024507 (2019).
[275] K.R. Jeon, X. Montiel, S. Komori, C. Ciccarelli, J. Haigh, H. Kurebayashi, L.F.
Cohen, A.K. Chan, K.D. Stenning, C.M. Lee, M.G. Blamire, J.W. Robinson,
Tunable Pure Spin Supercurrents and the Demonstration of Their Gateability in a
Spin-Wave Device, Physical Review X 10, 31020 (2020).
[276] A. Vargunin, M. Silaev, Flux flow spin Hall effect in type-II superconductors with
spin-splitting field, Scientific Reports 9, 5914 (2019).
[277] R. Asaoka, H. Tsuchiura, M. Sigrist, Spin-current induced around half-quantum
vortices in chiral p-wave superconducting states, Journal of Physics: Conference
Series 871, 012025 (2017).
[278] T. Taira, Y. Kato, M. Ichioka, H. Adachi, Spin Hall effect generated by fluctuating
vortices in type-II superconductors, Physical Review B 103, 1 (2021).
[279] K. Rogdakis, A. Sud, M. Amado, C.M. Lee, L. McKenzie-Sell, K.R. Jeon,
M. Cubukcu, M.G. Blamire, J.W.A. Robinson, L.F. Cohen, H. Kurebayashi,
Spin transport parameters of NbN thin films characterized by spin pumping experiments, Physical Review Materials 3, 14406 (2019).
[280] A. Hoffmann, Spin Hall Effects in Metals, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 49,
5172 (2013).
[281] J. Gückelhorn, A. Kamra, T. Wimmer, M. Opel, S. Geprägs, R. Gross,
H. Huebl, M. Althammer, Influence of low-energy magnons on magnon Hanle
experiments in easy-plane antiferromagnets, Physical Review B 105, 094440
(2022).
[282] N. Poli, J.P. Morten, M. Urech, A. Brataas, D.B. Haviland, V. Korenivski,
Spin Injection and Relaxation in a Mesoscopic Superconductor, Physical Review
Letters 100, 136601 (2008).
[283] H. Yang, S.H. Yang, S. Takahashi, S. Maekawa, S.S.P. Parkin, Extremely long
quasiparticle spin lifetimes in superconducting aluminium using MgO tunnel spin
injectors, Nature Materials 9, 586 (2010).

211

[284] J.Y. Gu, J.A. Caballero, R.D. Slater, R. Loloee, W.P. Pratt, Direct measurement
of quasiparticle evanescent waves in a dirty superconductor, Physical Review B
66, 140507 (2002).
[285] K.R. Jeon, C. Ciccarelli, H. Kurebayashi, J. Wunderlich, L.F. Cohen, S. Komori, J.W.A. Robinson, M.G. Blamire, Spin-Pumping-Induced Inverse Spin Hall
Effect in Nb/Ni80Fe20 Bilayers and its Strong Decay Across the Superconducting
Transition Temperature, Physical Review Applied 10, 014029 (2018).
[286] K.R. Jeon, C. Ciccarelli, H. Kurebayashi, L.F. Cohen, X. Montiel, M. Eschrig,
S. Komori, J.W.A. Robinson, M.G. Blamire, Exchange-field enhancement of
superconducting spin pumping, Physical Review B 99, 024507 (2019).
[287] K.R. Jeon, C. Ciccarelli, H. Kurebayashi, L.F. Cohen, X. Montiel, M. Eschrig,
T. Wagner, S. Komori, A. Srivastava, J.W. Robinson, M.G. Blamire, Effect of
Meissner Screening and Trapped Magnetic Flux on Magnetization Dynamics in
Thick Nb/Ni80Fe20/Nb Trilayers , Physical Review Applied 11, 014061 (2019).
[288] K.R. Jeon, C. Ciccarelli, H. Kurebayashi, L.F. Cohen, S. Komori, J.W.A.
Robinson, M.G. Blamire, Abrikosov vortex nucleation and its detrimental effect
on superconducting spin pumping in Pt/Nb/Ni80Fe20/Nb/Pt proximity structures,
Physical Review B 99, 144503 (2019).
[289] S.H. Jacobsen, J.A. Ouassou, J. Linder, Critical temperature and tunneling spectroscopy of superconductor-ferromagnet hybrids with intrinsic Rashba-Dresselhaus
spin-orbit coupling, Physical Review B 92, 024510 (2015).
[290] F.S. Bergeret, I.V. Tokatly, Spin-orbit coupling as a source of long-range triplet
proximity effect in superconductor-ferromagnet hybrid structures, Physical Review
B 89, 134517 (2014).
[291] S. Nadj-Perge, I.K. Drozdov, J. Li, H. Chen, S. Jeon, J. Seo, A.H. MacDonald,
B.A. Bernevig, A. Yazdani, Observation of Majorana fermions in ferromagnetic
atomic chains on a superconductor, Science 346, 602 (2014).
[292] E. Sajadi, T. Palomaki, Z. Fei, W. Zhao, P. Bement, C. Olsen, S. Luescher,
X. Xu, J.A. Folk, D.H. Cobden, Gate-induced superconductivity in a monolayer
topological insulator, Science 362, 922 (2018).
[293] V. Fatemi, S. Wu, Y. Cao, L. Bretheau, Q.D. Gibson, K. Watanabe,
T. Taniguchi, R.J. Cava, P. Jarillo-Herrero, Electrically tunable low-density
superconductivity in a monolayer topological insulator, Science 362, 926 (2018).
[294] X. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Zheng, J. Wang, Superconductivity in large
spin-orbit coupled material IrTe2, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids
128, 245 (2019).

212

[295] J.J. He, K. Hiroki, K. Hamamoto, N. Nagaosa, Spin supercurrent in twodimensional superconductors with Rashba spin-orbit interaction, Communications
Physics 2, 128 (2019).
[296] M. Sato, Majorana fermions in topological superconductors with spin-orbit interaction, Journal of Physics: Conference Series 391, 012150 (2012).
[297] M. Sato, S. Fujimoto, Existence of Majorana Fermions and Topological Order in
Nodal Superconductors with Spin-Orbit Interactions in External Magnetic Fields,
Physical Review Letters 105, 217001 (2010).
[298] M.M. Desjardins, L.C. Contamin, M.R. Delbecq, M.C. Dartiailh, L.E. Bruhat,
T. Cubaynes, J.J. Viennot, F. Mallet, S. Rohart, A. Thiaville, A. Cottet, T. Kontos, Synthetic spin–orbit interaction for Majorana devices, Nature Materials 18,
1060 (2019).
[299] K.M.D. Hals, Supercurrent-induced spin-orbit torques, Physical Review B 93,
115431 (2016).
[300] M. Alishahi, F. Mahboubi, S.M. Mousavi Khoie, M. Aparicio, E. Lopez-Elvira,
J. Méndez, R. Gago, Structural properties and corrosion resistance of tantalum
nitride coatings produced by reactive DC magnetron sputtering, RSC Advances 6,
89061 (2016).
[301] K. Baba, R. Hatada, Synthesis and properties of tantalum nitride films formed by
ion beam assisted deposition, Surface and Coatings Technology 84, 429 (1996).
[302] J.H. Han, H.Y. Kim, S.C. Lee, D.H. Kim, B.K. Park, J.S. Park, D.J.
Jeon, T.M. Chung, C.G. Kim, Growth of tantalum nitride film as a Cu
diffusion barrier by plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition from bis((2(dimethylamino)ethyl)(methyl)amido)methyl(tert-butylimido)tantalum complex,
Applied Surface Science 362, 176 (2016).
[303] S. Cho, K. Kim, S. Min, H. Shin, S. Kimd, Diffusion Barrier Properties of
Metallorganic Chemical Vapor Deposited Tantalum Nitride Films Against Cu
Metallization, Journal of The Electrochemical Society 146, 3724 (1999).
[304] T. Laurila, K. Zeng, J. Kivilahti, J. Molarius, T. Riekkinen, I. Suni, Tantalum carbide and nitride diffusion barriers for Cu metallisation, Microelectronic
Engineering 60, 71 (2002).
[305] E.B. Rosa, The self and mutual-inductances of linear conductors, Bulletin of the
Bureau of Standards 4, 301 (1908).
[306] F. London, H. London, The electromagnetic equations of the supraconductor,
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A - Mathematical and
Physical Sciences 149, 71 (1935).

213

[307] W. Meissner, R. Ochsenfeld, Ein neuer Effekt bei Eintritt der Supraleitfaehigkeit,
Die Naturwissenschaften 21, 787 (1933).
[308] H. Głowiński, M. Schmidt, I. Gościańska, J.P. Ansermet, J. Dubowik, Coplanar
waveguide based ferromagnetic resonance in ultrathin film magnetic nanostructures:
Impact of conducting layers, Journal of Applied Physics 116, 053901 (2014).
[309] B. Huang, M.A. McGuire, A.F. May, D. Xiao, P. Jarillo-Herrero, X. Xu,
Emergent phenomena and proximity effects in two-dimensional magnets and heterostructures., Nature Materials 19, 1276 (2020).
[310] Q.H. Wang, A. Bedoya-Pinto, M. Blei, A.H. Dismukes, A. Hamo, S. Jenkins,
M. Koperski, Y. Liu, Q.C. Sun, E.J. Telford, H.H. Kim, M. Augustin, U. Vool,
J.X. Yin, L.H. Li, A. Falin, C.R. Dean, F. Casanova, R.F.L. Evans, M. Chshiev,
A. Mishchenko, C. Petrovic, R. He, L. Zhao, A.W. Tsen, B.D. Gerardot,
M. Brotons-Gisbert, Z. Guguchia, X. Roy, S. Tongay, Z. Wang, M.Z. Hasan,
J. Wrachtrup, A. Yacoby, A. Fert, S. Parkin, K.S. Novoselov, P. Dai, L. Balicas,
E.J.G. Santos, The Magnetic Genome of Two-Dimensional van der Waals Materials,
ACS Nano 16, 6960 (2022).
[311] C.W. Zollitsch, S. Khan, V.T.T. Nam, I.A. Verzhbitskiy, D. Sagkovits,
J. O’Sullivan, O.W. Kennedy, M. Strungaru, E.J.G. Santos, J.J.L. Morton,
G. Eda, H. Kurebayashi, Probing spin dynamics of ultra-thin van der Waals
magnets via photon-magnon coupling, Nature Communications 14, 2619 (2023).
[312] A.I. Gubin, K.S. Il’in, S.A. Vitusevich, M. Siegel, N. Klein, Dependence of
magnetic penetration depth on the thickness of superconducting Nb thin films,
Physical Review B 72, 064503 (2005).
[313] G. Horn, E. Saur, Präparation und Supraleitungseigenschaften von Niobnitrid
sowie Niobnitrid mit Titan-, Zirkon- und Tantalzusatz, Zeitschrift für Physik A
Hadrons and nuclei 210, 70 (1968).
[314] D. Hazra, N. Tsavdaris, S. Jebari, A. Grimm, F. Blanchet, F. Mercier, E. Blanquet, C. Chapelier, M. Hofheinz, Superconducting properties of very high quality
NbN thin films grown by high temperature chemical vapor deposition, Superconductor Science and Technology 29, 105011 (2016).
[315] M. Chand, A. Mishra, Y.M. Xiong, A. Kamlapure, S.P. Chockalingam, J. Jesudasan, V. Bagwe, M. Mondal, P.W. Adams, V. Tripathi, P. Raychaudhuri,
Temperature dependence of resistivity and Hall coefficient in strongly disordered
NbN thin films, Physical Review B 80, 134514 (2009).
[316] I. Golovchanskiy, N. Abramov, V. Stolyarov, V. Chichkov, M. Silaev,
I. Shchetinin, A. Golubov, V. Ryazanov, A. Ustinov, M. Kupriyanov,
Magnetization Dynamics in Proximity-Coupled Superconductor-FerromagnetSuperconductor Multilayers, Physical Review Applied 14, 024086 (2020).

214

[317] C. Luo, Z. Feng, Y. Fu, W. Zhang, P.K.J. Wong, Z.X. Kou, Y. Zhai, H.F. Ding,
M. Farle, J. Du, H.R. Zhai, Enhancement of magnetization damping coefficient
of permalloy thin films with dilute Nd dopants, Physical Review B 89, 184412
(2014).
[318] A. Ghosh, J.F. Sierra, S. Auffret, U. Ebels, W.E. Bailey, Dependence of nonlocal
Gilbert damping on the ferromagnetic layer type in ferromagnet/Cu/Pt heterostructures, Applied Physics Letters 98, 052508 (2011).
[319] D. Einzel, Universal Parameters in the Response of Unconventional Superconductors, Journal of Low temperature physics 126, 867 (2002).
[320] D. Einzel, Interpolation of BCS response functions, Journal of Low Temperature
Physics 130, 493 (2003).
[321] A.J. Annunziata, D.F. Santavicca, L. Frunzio, G. Catelani, M.J. Rooks, A. Frydman, D.E. Prober, Tunable superconducting nanoinductors, Nanotechnology
21, 445202 (2010).
[322] Y. Sun, Superconducting spintronics with magnetic insulators, Master’s Thesis
(2023).
[323] W. Yan, E. Sagasta, M. Ribeiro, Y. Niimi, L.E. Hueso, F. Casanova, Large room
temperature spin-to-charge conversion signals in a few-layer graphene/Pt lateral
heterostructure, Nature Communications 8, 661 (2017).
[324] T. Kimura, Y. Otani, T. Sato, S. Takahashi, S. Maekawa, Room-Temperature
Reversible Spin Hall Effect, Physical Review Letters 98, 156601 (2007).
[325] S. Takahashi, S. Maekawa, Spin Hall Effect in Superconductors, Japanese
Journal of Applied Physics 51, 010110 (2012).
[326] S. Takahashi, S. Maekawa, Spin Current in Metals and Superconductors, Journal
of the Physical Society of Japan 77, 031009 (2008).
[327] H. Kontani, J. Goryo, D.S. Hirashima, Intrinsic Spin Hall Effect in the s-Wave
Superconducting State: Analysis of the Rashba Model, Physical Review Letters
102, 086602 (2009).
[328] S. Takahashi, S. Maekawa, Hall Effect Induced by a Spin-Polarized Current in
Superconductors, Physical Review Letters 88, 116601 (2002).
[329] S. Takahashi, T. Yamashita, H. Imamura, S. Maekawa, Spin-relaxation and
magnetoresistance in FM/SC/FM tunnel junctions, Journal of Magnetism and
Magnetic Materials 240, 100 (2002).
[330] L. Berger, Side-Jump Mechanism for the Hall Effect of Ferromagnets, Physical
Review B 2, 4559 (1970).

215

[331] A. Fert, A. Friederich, Skew scattering by rare-earth impurities in silver, gold,
and aluminum, Physical Review B 13, 397 (1976).
[332] S. Onoda, N. Sugimoto, N. Nagaosa, Intrinsic Versus Extrinsic Anomalous
Hall Effect in Ferromagnets, Physical Review Letters 97, 126602 (2006).
[333] S. Mironov, A. Buzdin, Spontaneous Currents in Superconducting Systems with
Strong Spin-Orbit Coupling, Physical Review Letters 118, 077001 (2017).
[334] S. Mironov, A.S. Mel’nikov, A. Buzdin, Electromagnetic proximity effect in
planar superconductor-ferromagnet structures, Applied Physics Letters 113,
022601 (2018).
[335] O.V. Dobrovolskiy, R. Sachser, M. Huth, V.A. Shklovskij, R.V. Vovk, V.M.
Bevz, M.I. Tsindlekht, Radiofrequency generation by coherently moving fluxons,
Applied Physics Letters 112, 152601 (2018).
[336] A.A. Awad, F.G. Aliev, G.W. Ataklti, A. Silhanek, V.V. Moshchalkov, Y.M.
Galperin, V. Vinokur, Flux avalanches triggered by microwave depinning of
magnetic vortices in Pb superconducting films, Physical Review B 84, 224511
(2011).
[337] J.A. Ouassou, W. Belzig, J. Linder, Prediction of a Paramagnetic Meissner
Effect in Voltage-Biased Superconductor–Normal-Metal Bilayers, Physical Review
Letters 124, 047001 (2020).
[338] K. Il’in, M. Hofherr, D. Rall, M. Siegel, A. Semenov, A. Engel, K. Inderbitzin, A. Aeschbacher, A. Schilling, Ultra-thin TaN Films for Superconducting
Nanowire Single-Photon Detectors, Journal of Low Temperature Physics 167,
809 (2012).
[339] K.S. Il’in, D. Rall, M. Siegel, A. Semenov, Critical current density in thin
superconducting TaN film structures, Physica C: Superconductivity 479, 176
(2012).
[340] C.S. Shin, D. Gall, Y.W. Kim, P. Desjardins, I. Petrov, J.E. Greene, M. Odén,
L. Hultman, Epitaxial NaCl structure δ-TaNx(001): Electronic transport properties, elastic modulus, and hardness versus N/Ta ratio, Journal of Applied Physics
90, 2879 (2001).
[341] S. Chaudhuri, I.J. Maasilta, L. Chandernagor, M. Ging, M. Lahtinen, Fabrication of superconducting tantalum nitride thin films using infrared pulsed laser
deposition, Journal of Vacuum Science & Technology A: Vacuum, Surfaces,
and Films 31, 061502 (2013).
[342] C.R.A. Catlow, J.M. Thomas, C.M. Freeman, P.A. Wright, R.G. Bell, Simulating and Predicting Crystal Structures, Proceedings of the Royal Society A:
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 442, 85 (1993).

216

[343] N.P. Breznay, K. Michaeli, K.S. Tikhonov, A.M. Finkel’stein, M. Tendulkar,
A. Kapitulnik, Hall conductivity dominated by fluctuations near the superconducting transition in disordered thin films, Physical Review B 86, 014514 (2012).
[344] K. Wakasugi, M. Tokunaga, T. Sumita, H. Kubota, M. Nagata, Y. Honda,
Superconductivity of reactivity sputtered TaN film for ULSI process, Physica B:
Condensed Matter 239, 29 (1997).
[345] T. Hashizume, A. Saiki, K. Terayama, Fabrication of Tantalum nitride thin film
using the low vacuum magnetron sputtering system, IOP Conference Series:
Materials Science and Engineering 18, 092032 (2011).
[346] R.M. Hill, Variable-range hopping, Physica Status Solidi (a) 34, 601 (1976).
[347] N.F. Mott, Conduction in non-crystalline materials, Philosophical Magazine 19,
835 (1969).
[348] N.P. Breznay, M. Tendulkar, L. Zhang, S.C. Lee, A. Kapitulnik, Superconductor
to weak-insulator transitions in disordered tantalum nitride films, Physical Review
B 96, 134522 (2017).
[349] W. Schoepe, Variable-range hopping conduction in doped germanium at very
low temperatures and high magnetic fields, Zeitschrift für Physik B Condensed
Matter 71, 455 (1988).
[350] D. Yu, C. Wang, B.L. Wehrenberg, P. Guyot-Sionnest, Variable Range Hopping
Conduction in Semiconductor Nanocrystal Solids, Physical Review Letters 92,
216802 (2004).
[351] S. Arrhenius, Über die Reaktionsgeschwindigkeit bei der Inversion von Rohrzucker
durch Säuren, Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie 4U, 226 (1889).
[352] S. Arrhenius, Über die Dissociationswärme und den Einfluss der Temperatur auf
den Dissociationsgrad der Elektrolyte, Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie 4U,
96 (1889).
[353] G. Counil, T. Devolder, J.V. Kim, P. Crozat, C. Chappert, S. Zoll, R. Fournel,
Temperature Dependences of the Resistivity and the Ferromagnetic Resonance
Linewidth in Permalloy Thin Films, IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 42, 3323
(2006).
[354] A. Zaman, E. Meletis, Microstructure and Mechanical Properties of TaN Thin
Films Prepared by Reactive Magnetron Sputtering, Coatings 7, 209 (2017).
[355] M. Silaev, Anderson-Higgs Mass of Magnons in Superconductor-FerromagnetSuperconductor Systems, Physical Review Applied 18, L061004 (2022).

217

[356] P.W. Swatek, X. Hang, Y. Fan, W. Jiang, H. Yun, D. Lyu, D. Zhang, T.J.
Peterson, P. Sahu, O.J. Benally, Z. Cresswell, J. Liu, R. Pahari, D. Kukla,
T. Low, K.A. Mkhoyan, J.p. Wang, Room temperature spin-orbit torque efficiency
in sputtered low-temperature superconductor δ -TaN, Physical Review Materials
6, 074206 (2022).
[357] T. Wakamura, N. Hasegawa, K. Ohnishi, Y. Niimi, Y. Otani, Spin Injection
into a Superconductor with Strong Spin-Orbit Coupling, Physical Review Letters
112, 036602 (2014).
[358] A.I. Buzdin, Proximity effects in superconductor-ferromagnet heterostructures,
Reviews of Modern Physics 77, 935 (2005).
[359] J.S. Jiang, D. Davidović, D.H. Reich, C.L. Chien, Oscillatory Superconducting
Transition Temperature in Nb/Gd Multilayers, Physical Review Letters 74, 314
(1995).
[360] M.G. Khusainov, Y.N. Proshin, Possibility of periodically reentrant superconductivity in ferromagnet/superconductor layered structures, Physical Review B 56,
R14283 (1997).
[361] C. Gorter, H. Casimir, On supraconductivity I, Physica 1, 306 (1934).
[362] L. Chirolli, M.T. Mercaldo, C. Guarcello, F. Giazotto, M. Cuoco, Colossal
Orbital Edelstein Effect in Noncentrosymmetric Superconductors, Physical Review
Letters 128, 217703 (2022).
[363] S.J. Carreira, D. Sanchez-Manzano, M.W. Yoo, K. Seurre, V. Rouco, A. Sander,
J. Santamarı́a, A. Anane, J.E. Villegas, Spin pumping in d -wave superconductorferromagnet hybrids, Physical Review B 104, 144428 (2021).
[364] Y. Yao, R. Cai, T. Yu, Y. Ma, W. Xing, Y. Ji, X.C. Xie, S.H. Yang, W. Han,
Giant oscillatory Gilbert damping in superconductor/ferromagnet/superconductor
junctions, Science Advances 7, eabh3686 (2021).
[365] L. Liensberger, L. Flacke, D. Rogerson, M. Althammer, R. Gross, M. Weiler,
Spin-Wave Propagation in Metallic Co25Fe75 Films Determined by Microfocused
Frequency-Resolved Magneto-Optic Kerr Effect, IEEE Magnetics Letters 10,
5503905 (2019).
[366] A. Blais, A.L. Grimsmo, S.M. Girvin, A. Wallraff, Circuit quantum electrodynamics, Reviews of Modern Physics 93, 025005 (2021).
[367] I. Chiorescu, P. Bertet, K. Semba, Y. Nakamura, C.J.P.M. Harmans, J.E. Mooij,
Coherent dynamics of a flux qubit coupled to a harmonic oscillator, Nature 431,
159 (2004).

218

[368] A. Wallraff, D.I. Schuster, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, R.S. Huang, J. Majer, S. Kumar, S.M. Girvin, R.J. Schoelkopf, Strong coupling of a single photon to a
superconducting qubit using circuit quantum electrodynamics, Nature 431, 162
(2004).
[369] Y.P. Korneeva, D.Y. Vodolazov, A.V. Semenov, I.N. Florya, N. Simonov,
E. Baeva, A.A. Korneev, G.N. Goltsman, T.M. Klapwijk, Optical Single-Photon
Detection in Micrometer-Scale NbN Bridges, Physical Review Applied 9, 064037
(2018).
[370] S.N. Dorenbos, P. Forn-Dı́az, T. Fuse, A.H. Verbruggen, T. Zijlstra, T.M.
Klapwijk, V. Zwiller, Low gap superconducting single photon detectors for infrared
sensitivity, Applied Physics Letters 98, 251102 (2011).
[371] G. Reithmaier, S. Lichtmannecker, T. Reichert, P. Hasch, K. Müller, M. Bichler,
R. Gross, J.J. Finley, On-chip time resolved detection of quantum dot emission
using integrated superconducting single photon detectors, Scientific Reports 3,
1901 (2013).
[372] N. Bergeal, R. Vijay, V.E. Manucharyan, I. Siddiqi, R.J. Schoelkopf, S.M.
Girvin, M.H. Devoret, Analog information processing at the quantum limit with
a Josephson ring modulator, Nature Physics 6, 296 (2010).
[373] M.A. Castellanos-Beltran, K.W. Lehnert, Widely tunable parametric amplifier
based on a superconducting quantum interference device array resonator, Applied
Physics Letters 91, 083509 (2007).
[374] E.A. Tholén, A. Ergül, E.M. Doherty, F.M. Weber, F. Grégis, D.B. Haviland,
Nonlinearities and parametric amplification in superconducting coplanar waveguide
resonators, Applied Physics Letters 90, 253509 (2007).
[375] M. Aspelmeyer, T.J. Kippenberg, F. Marquardt, Cavity optomechanics, Reviews
of Modern Physics 86, 1391 (2014).
[376] Y. Li, T. Polakovic, Y.L. Wang, J. Xu, S. Lendinez, Z. Zhang, J. Ding, T. Khaire,
H. Saglam, R. Divan, J. Pearson, W.K. Kwok, Z. Xiao, V. Novosad, A. Hoffmann, W. Zhang, Strong Coupling between Magnons and Microwave Photons
in On-Chip Ferromagnet-Superconductor Thin-Film Devices, Physical Review
Letters 123, 107701 (2019).
[377] Y. Tabuchi, S. Ishino, T. Ishikawa, R. Yamazaki, K. Usami, Y. Nakamura,
Hybridizing Ferromagnetic Magnons and Microwave Photons in the Quantum
Limit, Physical Review Letters 113, 083603 (2014).
[378] D.I. Schuster, A.P. Sears, E. Ginossar, L. DiCarlo, L. Frunzio, J.J.L. Morton,
H. Wu, G.A.D. Briggs, B.B. Buckley, D.D. Awschalom, R.J. Schoelkopf, High-

219

Cooperativity Coupling of Electron-Spin Ensembles to Superconducting Cavities,
Physical Review Letters 105, 140501 (2010).
[379] Y. Kubo, C. Grezes, A. Dewes, T. Umeda, J. Isoya, H. Sumiya, N. Morishita,
H. Abe, S. Onoda, T. Ohshima, V. Jacques, A. Dréau, J.F. Roch, I. Diniz,
A. Auffeves, D. Vion, D. Esteve, P. Bertet, Hybrid Quantum Circuit with a
Superconducting Qubit Coupled to a Spin Ensemble, Physical Review Letters
107, 220501 (2011).
[380] J. Majer, J.M. Chow, J.M. Gambetta, J. Koch, B.R. Johnson, J.A. Schreier,
L. Frunzio, D.I. Schuster, A.A. Houck, A. Wallraff, A. Blais, M.H. Devoret,
S.M. Girvin, R.J. Schoelkopf, Coupling superconducting qubits via a cavity bus,
Nature 449, 443 (2007).
[381] S. Weichselbaumer, M. Zens, C.W. Zollitsch, M.S. Brandt, S. Rotter, R. Gross,
H. Huebl, Echo Trains in Pulsed Electron Spin Resonance of a Strongly Coupled
Spin Ensemble, Physical Review Letters 125, 137701 (2020).
[382] C.W. Zollitsch, K. Mueller, D.P. Franke, S.T.B. Goennenwein, M.S. Brandt,
R. Gross, H. Huebl, High cooperativity coupling between a phosphorus donor spin
ensemble and a superconducting microwave resonator, Applied Physics Letters
107, 142105 (2015).
[383] R. Narkowicz, D. Suter, R. Stonies, Planar microresonators for EPR experiments,
Journal of Magnetic Resonance 175, 275 (2005).
[384] W.J. Wallace, R.H. Silsbee, Microstrip resonators for electron-spin resonance,
Review of Scientific Instruments 62, 1754 (1991).
[385] S. Kim, H. Terai, T. Yamashita, W. Qiu, T. Fuse, F. Yoshihara, S. Ashhab,
K. Inomata, K. Semba, Enhanced coherence of all-nitride superconducting qubits
epitaxially grown on silicon substrate, Communications Materials 2, 98 (2021).
[386] M. Lyatti, M.A. Wolff, I. Gundareva, M. Kruth, S. Ferrari, R.E. DuninBorkowski, C. Schuck, Energy-level quantization and single-photon control of
phase slips in YBa2 Cu3 O7–x nanowires, Nature Communications 11, 763 (2020).
[387] R. Di Leo, A. Nigro, G. Nobile, R. Vaglio, Niboium-titanium nitride thin films
for superconducting rf accelerator cavities, Journal of Low Temperature Physics
78, 41 (1990).
[388] C.M. Yen, L.E. Toth, Y.M. Shy, D.E. Anderson, L.G. Rosner, Superconducting
H c - J c and T c Measurements in the Nb–Ti–N, Nb–Hf–N, and Nb–V–N Ternary
Systems, Journal of Applied Physics 38, 2268 (1967).
[389] E.R. Edwards, H.T. Nembach, J.M. Shaw, Co25Fe75 Thin Films with Ultralow
Total Damping of Ferromagnetic Resonance, Physical Review Applied 11, 054036
(2019).

220

[390] M.A.W. Schoen, D. Thonig, M.L. Schneider, T.J. Silva, H.T. Nembach,
O. Eriksson, O. Karis, J.M. Shaw, Ultra-low magnetic damping of a metallic
ferromagnet, Nature Physics 12, 839 (2016).
[391] C. Müller, J.H. Cole, J. Lisenfeld, Towards understanding two-level-systems
in amorphous solids: insights from quantum circuits, Reports on Progress in
Physics 82, 124501 (2019).
[392] M.V.P. Altoé, A. Banerjee, C. Berk, A. Hajr, A. Schwartzberg, C. Song, M. Alghadeer, S. Aloni, M.J. Elowson, J.M. Kreikebaum, E.K. Wong, S.M. Griffin,
S. Rao, A. Weber-Bargioni, A.M. Minor, D.I. Santiago, S. Cabrini, I. Siddiqi,
D.F. Ogletree, Localization and Mitigation of Loss in Niobium Superconducting
Circuits, PRX Quantum 3, 020312 (2022).
[393] J. Goetz, The Interplay of Superconducting Quantum Circuits and Propagating
Microwave States, PhD Thesis (2017).
[394] I. Nsanzineza, B.L.T. Plourde, Trapping a Single Vortex and Reducing Quasiparticles in a Superconducting Resonator, Physical Review Letters 113, 117002
(2014).
[395] G. Stan, S.B. Field, J.M. Martinis, Critical Field for Complete Vortex Expulsion
from Narrow Superconducting Strips, Physical Review Letters 92, 097003 (2004).
[396] M. Sandberg, M.R. Vissers, T.A. Ohki, J. Gao, J. Aumentado, M. Weides, D.P.
Pappas, Radiation-suppressed superconducting quantum bit in a planar geometry,
Applied Physics Letters 102, 072601 (2013).
[397] H. Paik, D.I. Schuster, L.S. Bishop, G. Kirchmair, G. Catelani, A.P. Sears, B.R.
Johnson, M.J. Reagor, L. Frunzio, L.I. Glazman, S.M. Girvin, M.H. Devoret,
R.J. Schoelkopf, Observation of High Coherence in Josephson Junction Qubits
Measured in a Three-Dimensional Circuit QED Architecture, Physical Review
Letters 107, 240501 (2011).
[398] J.M. Martinis, K.B. Cooper, R. McDermott, M. Steffen, M. Ansmann, K.D.
Osborn, K. Cicak, S. Oh, D.P. Pappas, R.W. Simmonds, C.C. Yu, Decoherence
in Josephson Qubits from Dielectric Loss, Physical Review Letters 95, 210503
(2005).
[399] W.A. Phillips, Two-level states in glasses, Reports on Progress in Physics 50,
1657 (1987).
[400] H. Wang, M. Hofheinz, J. Wenner, M. Ansmann, R.C. Bialczak, M. Lenander,
E. Lucero, M. Neeley, A.D. O’Connell, D. Sank, M. Weides, A.N. Cleland, J.M.
Martinis, Improving the coherence time of superconducting coplanar resonators,
Applied Physics Letters 95, 233508 (2009).

221

[401] A. Melville, G. Calusine, W. Woods, K. Serniak, E. Golden, B.M. Niedzielski,
D.K. Kim, A. Sevi, J.L. Yoder, E.A. Dauler, W.D. Oliver, Comparison of dielectric
loss in titanium nitride and aluminum superconducting resonators, Applied
Physics Letters 117, 124004 (2020).
[402] A. Bruno, G. de Lange, S. Asaad, K.L. van der Enden, N.K. Langford,
L. DiCarlo, Reducing intrinsic loss in superconducting resonators by surface
treatment and deep etching of silicon substrates, Applied Physics Letters 106,
182601 (2015).
[403] A.M. Holder, K.D. Osborn, C.J. Lobb, C.B. Musgrave, Bulk and Surface
Tunneling Hydrogen Defects in Alumina, Physical Review Letters 111, 065901
(2013).
[404] D. Bunch, Minimizing Losses in Superconducting Coplanar Waveguide Resonators,
Master’s Thesis (2022).
[405] K. Agarwal, I. Martin, M.D. Lukin, E. Demler, Polaronic model of two-level
systems in amorphous solids, Physical Review B 87, 144201 (2013).
[406] H. Kikyuama, N. Miki, K. Saka, J. Takano, I. Kawanabe, M. Miyashita,
T. Ohmi, Principles of Wet Chemical Processing in ULSI Microfabrication, IEEE
Transactions on Semiconductor Manufacturing 4, 26 (1991).
[407] N.E. Grant, J.D. Murphy, Temporary Surface Passivation for Characterisation of
Bulk Defects in Silicon: A Review, physica status solidi (RRL) - Rapid Research
Letters 11, 1700243 (2017).
[408] M.R. Vissers, J. Gao, D.S. Wisbey, D.A. Hite, C.C. Tsuei, A.D. Corcoles,
M. Steffen, D.P. Pappas, Low loss superconducting titanium nitride coplanar
waveguide resonators, Applied Physics Letters 97, 232509 (2010).
[409] L. Zhang, W. Peng, L.X. You, Z. Wang, Superconducting properties and chemical
composition of NbTiN thin films with different thickness, Applied Physics Letters
107, 122603 (2015).
[410] H. Myoren, T. Shimizu, T. Iizuka, S. Takada, Properties of NbTiN thin films
prepared by reactive DC magnetron sputtering, IEEE Transactions on Appiled
Superconductivity 11, 3828 (2001).
[411] A. Megrant, C. Neill, R. Barends, B. Chiaro, Y. Chen, L. Feigl, J. Kelly,
E. Lucero, M. Mariantoni, P.J.J. O’Malley, D. Sank, A. Vainsencher, J. Wenner,
T.C. White, Y. Yin, J. Zhao, C.J. Palmstrøm, J.M. Martinis, A.N. Cleland,
Planar superconducting resonators with internal quality factors above one million,
Applied Physics Letters 100, 113510 (2012).
[412] P. Natzkin, Superconducting Microwave Resonator Designs for Electron Spin
Resonance Applications, Master’s thesis, Technical University Munich (2017).

222

[413] O.V. Dobrovolskiy, M. Huth, Crossover from dirty to clean superconducting limit
in dc magnetron-sputtered thin Nb films, Thin Solid Films 520, 5985 (2012).
[414] L. Zhang, L. You, L. Ying, W. Peng, Z. Wang, Characterization of surface
oxidation layers on ultrathin NbTiN films, Physica C: Superconductivity and
its Applications 545, 1 (2018).
[415] S. Weichselbaumer, P. Natzkin, C.W. Zollitsch, M. Weiler, R. Gross, H. Huebl,
Quantitative Modeling of Superconducting Planar Resonators for Electron Spin
Resonance, Physical Review Applied 12, 024021 (2019).
[416] C. Grezes, B. Julsgaard, Y. Kubo, M. Stern, T. Umeda, J. Isoya, H. Sumiya,
H. Abe, S. Onoda, T. Ohshima, V. Jacques, J. Esteve, D. Vion, D. Esteve,
K. Mølmer, P. Bertet, Multimode storage and retrieval of microwave fields in a
spin ensemble, Physical Review X 4, 1 (2014).
[417] P. Rinck, Magnetic Resonance in Medicine: A Critical Introduction, Books on
Demand (2019).
[418] M. Reagor, H. Paik, G. Catelani, L. Sun, C. Axline, E. Holland, I.M. Pop, N.A.
Masluk, T. Brecht, L. Frunzio, M.H. Devoret, L. Glazman, R.J. Schoelkopf,
Reaching 10 ms single photon lifetimes for superconducting aluminum cavities,
Applied Physics Letters 102, 192604 (2013).
[419] T. Van Duzer, C. Turner, Principles of Superconductive Devices and Circuits,
Bibliyografya Ve Indeks, Prentice Hall (1999).
[420] L. Yu, R. Singh, H. Liu, S. Wu, R. Hu, D. Durand, J. Bulman, J. Rowell,
N. Newman, Fabrication of Niobium Titanium Nitride Thin Films With High
Superconducting Transition Temperatures and Short Penetration Lengths, IEEE
Transactions on Appiled Superconductivity 15, 44 (2005).
[421] H.G. Leduc, B. Bumble, P.K. Day, B.H. Eom, J. Gao, S. Golwala, B.A. Mazin,
S. McHugh, A. Merrill, D.C. Moore, O. Noroozian, A.D. Turner, J. Zmuidzinas, Titanium nitride films for ultrasensitive microresonator detectors, Applied
Physics Letters 97, 102509 (2010).
[422] Z.K. Minev, I.M. Pop, M.H. Devoret, Planar superconducting whispering gallery
mode resonators, Applied Physics Letters 103, 142604 (2013).
[423] P.K. Day, H.G. LeDuc, B.A. Mazin, A. Vayonakis, J. Zmuidzinas, A broadband
superconducting detector suitable for use in large arrays, Nature 425, 817 (2003).
[424] S.E. de Graaf, A.V. Danilov, A. Adamyan, T. Bauch, S.E. Kubatkin, Magnetic
field resilient superconducting fractal resonators for coupling to free spins, Journal
of Applied Physics 112, 123905 (2012).

223

[425] C.W. Zollitsch, J. O’Sullivan, O. Kennedy, G. Dold, J.J.L. Morton, Tuning
high-Q superconducting resonators by magnetic field reorientation, AIP Advances
9, 125225 (2019).
[426] M. Xu, X. Han, W. Fu, C.L. Zou, H.X. Tang, Frequency-tunable high- Q
superconducting resonators via wireless control of nonlinear kinetic inductance,
Applied Physics Letters 114, 192601 (2019).
[427] R. Barends, N. Vercruyssen, A. Endo, P.J. de Visser, T. Zijlstra, T.M. Klapwijk,
P. Diener, S.J.C. Yates, J.J.A. Baselmans, Minimal resonator loss for circuit
quantum electrodynamics, Applied Physics Letters 97, 023508 (2010).
[428] C.T. Earnest, J.H. Béjanin, T.G. McConkey, E.A. Peters, A. Korinek, H. Yuan,
M. Mariantoni, Substrate surface engineering for high-quality silicon/aluminum
superconducting resonators, Superconductor Science and Technology 31,
125013 (2018).
[429] J. Burnett, L. Faoro, T. Lindström, Analysis of high quality superconducting
resonators: consequences for TLS properties in amorphous oxides, Superconductor
Science and Technology 29, 044008 (2016).
[430] J. Verjauw, A. Potočnik, M. Mongillo, R. Acharya, F. Mohiyaddin, G. Simion,
A. Pacco, T. Ivanov, D. Wan, A. Vanleenhove, L. Souriau, J. Jussot, A. Thiam,
J. Swerts, X. Piao, S. Couet, M. Heyns, B. Govoreanu, I. Radu, Investigation
of Microwave Loss Induced by Oxide Regrowth in High- Q Niobium Resonators,
Physical Review Applied 16, 014018 (2021).
[431] M.V.P. Altoé, A. Banerjee, C. Berk, A. Hajr, A. Schwartzberg, C. Song, M. Alghadeer, S. Aloni, M.J. Elowson, J.M. Kreikebaum, E.K. Wong, S.M. Griffin,
S. Rao, A. Weber-Bargioni, A.M. Minor, D.I. Santiago, S. Cabrini, I. Siddiqi,
D.F. Ogletree, Localization and Mitigation of Loss in Niobium Superconducting
Circuits, PRX Quantum 3, 020312 (2022).
[432] C.X. Yu, S. Zihlmann, G. Troncoso Fernández-Bada, J.l. Thomassin, F. Gustavo, É. Dumur, R. Maurand, Magnetic field resilient high kinetic inductance
superconducting niobium nitride coplanar waveguide resonators, Applied Physics
Letters 118, 054001 (2021).
[433] J. Weber, Magnetoelastic coupling with metallic materials, Master’s Thesis (2023).
[434] J. Franz, Superconducting Microwave Resonators for Spin-Based Quantum Memories, Master’s Thesis (2023).
[435] C.E. Mortimer, J. Beck, U. Müller, Chemie : das Basiswissen der Chemie, Thieme,
Stuttgart [u.a.] (2014).

224

[436] D. Schwienbacher, M. Pernpeintner, L. Liensberger, E.R.J. Edwards, H.T.
Nembach, J.M. Shaw, M. Weiler, R. Gross, H. Huebl, Magnetoelasticity of
Co25Fe75 thin films, Journal of Applied Physics 126, 103902 (2019).
[437] P.F. Herskind, A. Dantan, J.P. Marler, M. Albert, M. Drewsen, Realization of
collective strong coupling with ion Coulomb crystals in an optical cavity, Nature
Physics 5, 494 (2009).
[438] D. Lachance-Quirion, Y. Tabuchi, S. Ishino, A. Noguchi, T. Ishikawa, R. Yamazaki, Y. Nakamura, Resolving quanta of collective spin excitations in a
millimeter-sized ferromagnet, Science Advances 3, e1603150 (2017).
[439] L. Bai, M. Harder, P. Hyde, Z. Zhang, C.M. Hu, Y.P. Chen, J.Q. Xiao, Cavity Mediated Manipulation of Distant Spin Currents Using a Cavity-MagnonPolariton, Physical Review Letters 118, 217201 (2017).
[440] X. Zhang, C.L. Zou, N. Zhu, F. Marquardt, L. Jiang, H.X. Tang, Magnon dark
modes and gradient memory, Nature Communications 6, 8914 (2015).
[441] Y. Chu, P. Kharel, W.H. Renninger, L.D. Burkhart, L. Frunzio, P.T. Rakich,
R.J. Schoelkopf, Quantum acoustics with superconducting qubits, Science 358,
199 (2017).
[442] Y. Chu, P. Kharel, T. Yoon, L. Frunzio, P.T. Rakich, R.J. Schoelkopf, Creation
and control of multi-phonon Fock states in a bulk acoustic-wave resonator, Nature
563, 666 (2018).
[443] C.T. Hann, C.L. Zou, Y. Zhang, Y. Chu, R.J. Schoelkopf, S.M. Girvin, L. Jiang,
Hardware-Efficient Quantum Random Access Memory with Hybrid Quantum
Acoustic Systems, Physical Review Letters 123, 250501 (2019).
[444] A. Wallucks, I. Marinković, B. Hensen, R. Stockill, S. Gröblacher, A quantum
memory at telecom wavelengths, Nature Physics 16, 772 (2020).
[445] X. Han, C.L. Zou, W. Fu, M. Xu, Y. Xu, H.X. Tang, Superconducting Cavity
Electromechanics: The Realization of an Acoustic Frequency Comb at Microwave
Frequencies, Physical Review Letters 129, 107701 (2022).
[446] T.P. McKenna, J.D. Witmer, R.N. Patel, W. Jiang, R. Van Laer, P. ArrangoizArriola, E.A. Wollack, J.F. Herrmann, A.H. Safavi-Naeini, Cryogenic
microwave-to-optical conversion using a triply resonant lithium-niobate-on-sapphire
transducer, Optica 7, 1737 (2020).
[447] F. Engelhardt, V. Bittencourt, H. Huebl, O. Klein, S.V. Kusminskiy, Optimal
Broadband Frequency Conversion via a Magnetomechanical Transducer, Physical
Review Applied 18, 044059 (2022).

225

[448] M. Shen, J. Xie, C.L. Zou, Y. Xu, W. Fu, H.X. Tang, High frequency lithium
niobate film-thickness-mode optomechanical resonator, Applied Physics Letters
117, 131104 (2020).
[449] W. Jiang, C.J. Sarabalis, Y.D. Dahmani, R.N. Patel, F.M. Mayor, T.P. McKenna,
R. Van Laer, A.H. Safavi-Naeini, Efficient bidirectional piezo-optomechanical
transduction between microwave and optical frequency, Nature Communications
11, 1166 (2020).
[450] G. Arnold, M. Wulf, S. Barzanjeh, E.S. Redchenko, A. Rueda, W.J. Hease,
F. Hassani, J.M. Fink, Converting microwave and telecom photons with a silicon
photonic nanomechanical interface, Nature Communications 11, 4460 (2020).
[451] A. Bienfait, Y.P. Zhong, H.S. Chang, M.H. Chou, C.R. Conner, É. Dumur,
J. Grebel, G.A. Peairs, R.G. Povey, K.J. Satzinger, A.N. Cleland, Quantum
Erasure Using Entangled Surface Acoustic Phonons, Physical Review X 10,
021055 (2020).
[452] V. Jain, V.D. Kurilovich, Y.D. Dahmani, C.U. Lei, D. Mason, T. Yoon, L. Frunzio, P.T. Rakich, L. Glazman, R.J. Schoelkopf, Acoustic radiation from a superconducting qubit : From spontaneous emission to Rabi oscillations, arxiv 1–7
(2022).
[453] P. Delsing, A.N. Cleland, M.J.A. Schuetz, J. Knörzer, G. Giedke, J.I. Cirac,
K. Srinivasan, M. Wu, K.C. Balram, C. Bäuerle, T. Meunier, C.J.B. Ford, P.V.
Santos, E. Cerda-Méndez, H. Wang, H.J. Krenner, E.D.S. Nysten, M. Weiß,
G.R. Nash, L. Thevenard, C. Gourdon, P. Rovillain, M. Marangolo, J.Y.
Duquesne, G. Fischerauer, W. Ruile, A. Reiner, B. Paschke, D. Denysenko,
D. Volkmer, A. Wixforth, H. Bruus, M. Wiklund, J. Reboud, J.M. Cooper,
Y. Fu, M.S. Brugger, F. Rehfeldt, C. Westerhausen, The 2019 surface acoustic
waves roadmap, Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics 52, 353001 (2019).
[454] K.J. Satzinger, Y.P. Zhong, H.S. Chang, G.A. Peairs, A. Bienfait, M.H. Chou,
A.Y. Cleland, C.R. Conner, É. Dumur, J. Grebel, I. Gutierrez, B.H. November,
R.G. Povey, S.J. Whiteley, D.D. Awschalom, D.I. Schuster, A.N. Cleland,
Quantum control of surface acoustic-wave phonons, Nature 563, 661 (2018).
[455] C.A. Potts, E. Varga, V.A.S.V. Bittencourt, S.V. Kusminskiy, J.P. Davis, Dynamical Backaction Magnomechanics, Physical Review X 11, 031053 (2021).
[456] A.D. O’Connell, M. Hofheinz, M. Ansmann, R.C. Bialczak, M. Lenander,
E. Lucero, M. Neeley, D. Sank, H. Wang, M. Weides, J. Wenner, J.M. Martinis,
A.N. Cleland, Quantum ground state and single-phonon control of a mechanical
resonator, Nature 464, 697 (2010).

226

[457] M. Goryachev, D.L. Creedon, E.N. Ivanov, S. Galliou, R. Bourquin, M.E.
Tobar, Extremely low-loss acoustic phonons in a quartz bulk acoustic wave resonator
at millikelvin temperature, Applied Physics Letters 100, 243504 (2012).
[458] M. Goryachev, Z. Kuang, E.N. Ivanov, P. Haslinger, H. Muller, M.E. Tobar,
Next Generation of Phonon Tests of Lorentz Invariance Using Quartz BAW Resonators, IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency
Control 65, 991 (2018).
[459] G. Andersson, S.W. Jolin, M. Scigliuzzo, R. Borgani, M.O. Tholén, J. Rivera
Hernández, V. Shumeiko, D.B. Haviland, P. Delsing, Squeezing and Multimode
Entanglement of Surface Acoustic Wave Phonons, PRX Quantum 3, 010312
(2022).
[460] M.K. Ekström, T. Aref, J. Runeson, J. Björck, I. Boström, P. Delsing, Surface acoustic wave unidirectional transducers for quantum applications, Applied
Physics Letters 110, 073105 (2017).
[461] A. Rückriegel, R.A. Duine, Long-Range Phonon Spin Transport in Ferromagnet–Nonmagnetic Insulator Heterostructures, Physical Review Letters 124,
117201 (2020).
[462] A.T. Levine, A note concerning the spin of the phonon, Il Nuovo Cimento 26,
190 (1962).
[463] S.V. Vonsovskii, M.S. Svirskii, Phonon Spin, Soviet Physics, Solid State 3,
1568 (1962).
[464] B. Flebus, K. Shen, T. Kikkawa, K.i. Uchida, Z. Qiu, E. Saitoh, R.A. Duine,
G.E.W. Bauer, Magnon-polaron transport in magnetic insulators, Physical Review B 95, 144420 (2017).
[465] S. Sharma, V. S V Bittencourt, S. Viola Kusminskiy, Protocol for generating
an arbitrary quantum state of the magnetization in cavity magnonics, Journal of
Physics: Materials 5, 034006 (2022).
[466] V.A.S.V. Bittencourt, I. Liberal, S. Viola Kusminskiy, Optomagnonics in Dispersive Media: Magnon-Photon Coupling Enhancement at the Epsilon-near-Zero
Frequency, Physical Review Letters 128, 183603 (2022).
[467] V. Wachter, V.A.S.V. Bittencourt, S. Xie, S. Sharma, N. Joly, P.S. Russell,
F. Marquardt, S.V. Kusminskiy, Optical signatures of the coupled spin-mechanics
of a levitated magnetic microparticle, Journal of the Optical Society of America
B 38, 3858 (2021).
[468] W.K. Peria, D.L. Zhang, Y. Fan, J.P. Wang, P.A. Crowell, Anomalous temperature dependence of phonon pumping by ferromagnetic resonance in Co/Pd

227

multilayers with perpendicular anisotropy, Physical Review B 106, L060405
(2022).
[469] H. Keshtgar, M. Zareyan, G.E. Bauer, Acoustic parametric pumping of spin
waves, Solid State Communications 198, 30 (2014).
[470] M. Born, E. Wolf, A.B. Bhatia, P.C. Clemmow, D. Gabor, A.R. Stokes, A.M.
Taylor, P.A. Wayman, W.L. Wilcock, Principles of Optics, Cambridge University Press (1999).
[471] J. de Klerk, Behavior of Coherent Microwave Phonons at Low Temperatures
in Al2O3 using Vapor-Deposited Thin-Film Piezoelectric Transducers, Physical
Review 139, A1635 (1965).
[472] L. Landau, G. Rumer, Absorption of sounds in solids, Physiklaische Zeitschrift
der Sowjetunion 11 (1937).
[473] M. Barangi, P. Mazumder, Effect of temperature variations and thermal noise
on the static and dynamic behavior of straintronics devices, Journal of Applied
Physics 118, 173902 (2015).
[474] N. Ashcroft, N. Mermin, Solid State Physics, Cengage Learning (2011).
[475] J.P. Wolfe, Imaging Phonons, Cambridge University Press (1998).
[476] F.I. Fedorov, Theory of Elastic Waves in Crystals, Springer US, Boston, MA
(1968).
[477] J.W. Jaeken, S. Cottenier, Solving the Christoffel equation: Phase and group
velocities, Computer Physics Communications 207, 445 (2016).
[478] W.E. Tefft, Elastic constants of synthetic single crystal corundum, Journal of
Research of the National Bureau of Standards Section A: Physics and Chemistry 70A, 277 (1966).
[479] C. Malica, A.D. Corso, Quasi-harmonic temperature dependent elastic constants:
applications to silicon, aluminum, and silver, Journal of Physics: Condensed
Matter 32, 315902 (2020).
[480] Y. Minami, T. Yogi, K. Sakai, Thermal Phonon Resonance in Solid Glass, Japanese
Journal of Applied Physics 45, 4469 (2006).
[481] P. Hyde, L. Bai, M. Harder, C. Match, C.M. Hu, Indirect coupling between two
cavity modes via ferromagnetic resonance, Applied Physics Letters 109, 152405
(2016).
[482] L. Mihalceanu, V.I. Vasyuchka, D.A. Bozhko, T. Langner, A.Y. Nechiporuk,
V.F. Romanyuk, B. Hillebrands, A.A. Serga, Temperature-dependent relaxation

228

of dipole-exchange magnons in yttrium iron garnet films, Physical Review B 97,
1 (2018).
[483] S. Knauer, K. Davı́dková, D. Schmoll, R.O. Serha, A. Voronov, Q. Wang,
R. Verba, O.V. Dobrovolskiy, M. Lindner, T. Reimann, C. Dubs, M. Urbánek,
A.V. Chumak, Propagating spin-wave spectroscopy in a liquid-phase epitaxial
nanometer-thick YIG film at millikelvin temperatures, Journal of Applied Physics
133, 143905 (2023).
[484] Y. Zhao, Q. Song, S.H. Yang, T. Su, W. Yuan, S.S.P. Parkin, J. Shi, W. Han, Experimental Investigation of Temperature-Dependent Gilbert Damping in Permalloy
Thin Films, Scientific Reports 6, 22890 (2016).
[485] H. Zhang, W. Pang, H. Yu, E.S. Kim, High-tone bulk acoustic resonators on
sapphire, crystal quartz, fused silica, and silicon substrates, Journal of Applied
Physics 99, 124911 (2006).
[486] V.J. Gokhale, B.P. Downey, D.S. Katzer, N. Nepal, A.C. Lang, R.M. Stroud,
D.J. Meyer, Epitaxial bulk acoustic wave resonators as highly coherent multiphonon sources for quantum acoustodynamics, Nature Communications 11,
2314 (2020).
[487] C. Herring, Role of Low-Energy Phonons in Thermal Conduction, Physical
Review 95, 954 (1954).
[488] E. Klokholm, J. Aboaf, The saturation magnetostriction of thin polycrystalline
films of iron, cobalt, and nickel, Journal of Applied Physics 53, 2661 (1982).
[489] M. Yamamoto, Young’s Modulus of Elasticity and Its Change with Magnetization
in Iron-Cobalt Alloys, Physical Review 59, 768 (1941).
[490] G.K. White, M.L. Minges, Thermophysical properties of some key solids: An
update, International Journal of Thermophysics 18, 1269 (1997).
[491] Y.G. Kim, J.H. Song, S. Hong, S.H. Ahn, Piezoelectric strain sensor with high
sensitivity and high stretchability based on kirigami design cutting, npj Flexible
Electronics 6, 52 (2022).
[492] H. Wang, J. Liu, H. Cui, Y. Liu, J. Zhu, H. Wang, G. Song, Z. Li, D. Chen,
Strain Sensor with High Sensitivity and Large Response Range Based on SelfAssembled Elastic-Sliding Conductive Networks, ACS Applied Electronic Materials 3, 1758 (2021).
[493] I.E. Psarobas, D.A. Exarchos, T.E. Matikas, Birefringent phononic structures,
AIP Advances 4, 124307 (2014).

229

[494] T. Ueno, J. Qiu, J. Tani, Self-sensing magnetic force control by composite of giant
magnetostrictive and piezoelectric materials, The Proceedings of the International Conference on Motion and Vibration Control 6.2, 1081 (2002).
[495] R.G. Qhobosheane, M.R.P. Elenchezhian, P.P. Das, M. Rahman, M.M. Rabby,
V. Vadlamudi, K. Reifsnider, R. Raihan, Smart Self-Sensing Composite: Piezoelectric and Magnetostrictive FEA Modeling and Experimental Characterization
Using Wireless Detection Systems, Sensors 20, 6906 (2020).
[496] O. Cugat, J. Delamare, G. Reyne, Magnetic micro-actuators and systems (MAGMAS), IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 39, 3607 (2003).
[497] G. Reyne, J. Delamare, O. Cugat, Magnetic Micro-actuators (MAGMAS), in
Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology, 1–5, Elsevier (2005).
[498] R. Fermin, D. van Dinter, M. Hubert, B. Woltjes, M. Silaev, J. Aarts, K. Lahabi,
Superconducting Triplet Rim Currents in a Spin-Textured Ferromagnetic Disk,
Nano Letters 22, 2209 (2022).
[499] I.V. Bobkova, A.M. Bobkov, A. Kamra, W. Belzig, Magnon-cooparons in magnetsuperconductor hybrids, Communication Materials 3, 95 (2022).
[500] I.V. Bobkova, A.M. Bobkov, M.A. Silaev, Dynamic Spin-Triplet Order Induced
by Alternating Electric Fields in Superconductor-Ferromagnet-Superconductor
Josephson Junctions, Physical Review Letters 127, 147701 (2021).
[501] M. Alghadeer, A. Banerjee, A. Hajr, H. Hussein, H. Fariborzi, S.G. Rao,
Surface Passivation of Niobium Superconducting Quantum Circuits Using SelfAssembled Monolayers, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 15, 2319 (2023).
[502] K. Zheng, D. Kowsari, N.J. Thobaben, X. Du, X. Song, S. Ran, E.A. Henriksen,
D.S. Wisbey, K.W. Murch, Nitrogen Plasma Passivated Niobium Resonators for
Superconducting Quantum Circuits 120, 102601 (2022).
[503] B. Rana, Y. Otani, Towards magnonic devices based on voltage-controlled magnetic
anisotropy, Communication Physics 2, 90 (2019).
[504] T. Nozaki, J. Okabayashi, S. Tamaru, M. Konoto, T. Nozaki, S. Yuasa, Understanding voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy effect at Co/oxide interface,
Scientific Reports 13, 10640 (2023).
[505] J. Zhang, P.V. Lukashev, S.S. Jaswal, E.Y. Tsymbal, Model of orbital populations
for voltage-controlled magnetic anisotropy in transition-metal thin films, Physical
Review B 96, 014435 (2017).
[506] S. Kosen, H.X. Li, M. Rommel, D. Shiri, C. Warren, L. Grönberg, J. Salonen,
T. Abad, J. Biznárová, M. Caputo, L. Chen, K. Grigoras, G. Johansson, A.F.

230

Kockum, C. Križan, D.P. Lozano, G.J. Norris, A. Osman, J. FernándezPendás, A. Ronzani, A.F. Roudsari, S. Simbierowicz, G. Tancredi, A. Wallraff,
C. Eichler, J. Govenius, J. Bylander, Building blocks of a flip-chip integrated
superconducting quantum processor, Quantum Science and Technology 7,
035018 (2022).
[507] C.R. Conner, A. Bienfait, H.S. Chang, M.H. Chou, É. Dumur, J. Grebel, G.A.
Peairs, R.G. Povey, H. Yan, Y.P. Zhong, A.N. Cleland, Superconducting qubits
in a flip-chip architecture, Applied Physics Letters 118, 232602 (2021).
[508] J. Yu, Y. Zheng, S. Zhou, Q. Wang, S. Wu, H. Wu, T. Li, J. Cai, Indiumbased Flip-chip Interconnection for Superconducting Quantum Computing Application, in 2022 23rd International Conference on Electronic Packaging Technology
(ICEPT), 1–6, IEEE (2022), ISBN 978-1-6654-9905-7.
[509] P. Trempler, R. Dreyer, P. Geyer, C. Hauser, G. Woltersdorf, G. Schmidt,
Integration and characterization of micron-sized YIG structures with very low
Gilbert damping on arbitrary substrates, Applied Physics Letters 117, 232401
(2020).
[510] F. Heyroth, C. Hauser, P. Trempler, P. Geyer, F. Syrowatka, R. Dreyer,
S. Ebbinghaus, G. Woltersdorf, G. Schmidt, Monocrystalline Freestanding
Three-Dimensional Yttrium-Iron-Garnet Magnon Nanoresonators, Physical Review Applied 12, 054031 (2019).
[511] D. Moon, J. Jang, D. Choi, I.S. Shin, D. Lee, D. Bae, Y. Park, E. Yoon, An ultrathin compliant sapphire membrane for the growth of less strained, less defective
GaN, Journal of Crystal Growth 441, 52 (2016).
[512] S. Lee, J. Kim, J. Oh, J. Ryu, K. Hwang, J. Hwang, S. Kang, J.H. Choi, Y.C.
Sim, Y.H. Cho, T.H. Chung, T. Jeong, Y. Park, E. Yoon, A discrete core-shell-like
micro-light-emitting diode array grown on sapphire nano-membranes, Scientific
Reports 10, 7506 (2020).
[513] K. Takahashi, Magnon-phonon coupling in symmetric magneto-metallic thin
film/bulk acoustic wave resonator heterostructures, Bachelor’s Thesis (2023).
[514] W. Campbell, S. Galliou, M.E. Tobar, M. Goryachev, Electro-mechanical tuning
of high-Q bulk acoustic phonon modes at cryogenic temperatures, Applied Physics
Letters 122, 032202 (2023).
[515] B. Mühlschlegel, Die thermodynamischen Funktionen des Supraleiters, Zeitschrift
für Physik 155, 313 (1959).
[516] S.P. Chockalingam, M. Chand, J. Jesudasan, V. Tripathi, P. Raychaudhuri,
Superconducting properties and Hall effect of epitaxial NbN thin films, Physical
Review B 77, 214503 (2008).

231

[517] E. Silva, N. Pompeo, O.V. Dobrovolskiy, Vortices at Microwave Frequencies,
Physical Sciences Reviews 2, 1 (2017).
[518] H. Ge, Y.R. Jin, X.H. Song, High quality NbTiN films fabrication and rapid
thermal annealing investigation, Chinese Physics B 28, 077402 (2019).
[519] J.F. Nye, et al., Physical properties of crystals, Oxford university press (1985).
[520] G. Terrasanta, T. Sommer, M. Müller, M. Althammer, R. Gross, M. Poot,
Aluminum nitride integration on silicon nitride photonic circuits: a hybrid approach
towards on-chip nonlinear optics, Optics Express 30, 8537 (2022).
[521] R. Flaschmann, C. Schmid, L. Zugliani, S. Strohauer, F. Wietschorke, S. Grotowski, B. Jonas, M. Müller, M. Althammer, R. Gross, J.J. Finley, K. Müller,
Optimizing the growth conditions of Al mirrors for superconducting nanowire
single-photon detectors, Materials for Quantum Technology 3, 035002 (2023).
[522] S. Strohauer, F. Wietschorke, L. Zugliani, R. Flaschmann, C. Schmid, S. Grotowski, M. Müller, B. Jonas, M. Althammer, R. Gross, K. Müller, J.J. Finley,
Site-Selective Enhancement of Superconducting Nanowire Single-Photon Detectors
via Local Helium Ion Irradiation, Advanced Quantum Technologies 6, 2300139
(2023).

232

Acknowledgements Danksagung
The past three years of my PhD have been an intense formative experience, in
which I have dealt with a vast variety of different research topics and scientific
methods ranging from fixing UHV setups over experimental setup assembly to
data processing and manuscript writing. I hope, that this thesis will lay the
groundwork for future scientific endeavors at the WMI and that my research has
provided useful input for the field of spintronics. Importantly, I also got to know
many different personalities with varying mindsets, work ethics and ideas. In the
following, I want to thank the countless people, which have made my writing of
this thesis possible.
Prof. Dr. Rudolf Gross for giving me the opportunity to conduct my doctoral
thesis at the Walther-Meißner-Institut, for the very helpful comments on various
manuscripts and the present doctoral thesis, and for always having a simple
’Bierdeckel’ explanation to describe difficult physical concepts.
Dr. Matthias Althammer as my direct supervisor for your continuous support
throughout my entire time as a PhD student. Thank you very much for your
help and time in interpreting measurement data, proofreading the present thesis
and manuscripts, and for your continuous interest in my progress with new
measurements/projects and idea. Thank you also for giving me the freedom to
independently explore and implement my own ideas and for pushing me to see
them through, even when I was doubting them myself after less than favorable
reviews. I wish you all the best for both your private life and your scientific career.
PD Dr. habil. Hans Huebl for tasking and enabling me to work on various projects
outside of the field of spintronics such as the optimization of superconducting
resonators or hybrid coupling phenomena. Thanks to you, I feel, I have become a
more versatile and open-minded scientist. Furthermore, with your critical evaluation of all of my manuscripts, you have always revealed their flaws and open
question, which we could then account for and discuss before submission.
Prof. Dr. Mathias Weiler for your continued interest in my research despite

233

the many tasks, you faced with your move to and professorship in Kaiserslautern.
Thanks to our weekly Friday meetings, I could benefit from your helpful input
and vast knowledge long after you had left the WMI.
Dr. Stephan Geprägs for your continuous support and advice in material science and XRD experiments. I could always talk to you and get advice about
my latest material optimization issues. Also, I could always annoy you with the
exercise sheets for the solid state physics tutorials, despite your busy schedule.
Dr. Matthias Opel for always helping me out with the various SQUID-magnetometryrelated issues. As a member of the IT team, you also always helped me out with
managing the LRZ-accounts of my various students.
Regarding experimental work, I in particular benefited from the advice on bbFMR
from Dr. Lukas Liensberger and Dr. Luis Flacke. Without you two guys teaching me
this experimental method and laying the experimental groundwork, this thesis
would not have been possible. Also thanks to Lukas for introducing me to the
µFR-MOKE-technique.
For my research on superconducting resonators I could always rely on helpful
advice from Dr. Thomas Luschmann regarding both fabrication and measurements.
Naturally, the same also applies for the various issues with the nanobeam e-beam
lithography system, where you always knew the solution for the various problems
I encountered.
For cleanroom fabrication tasks in general, ’Fab God’ Leon Koch and Niklas Bruckmoser could always help me out with my various issues.
Of course, I also want to thank my PhD colleagues Dr. Tobias Wimmer, Dr.
Janine Gückelhorn, Monika Scheufele and Matthias ’Matze’ Grammer in general for
the productive work atmosphere, where we always showed mutual interest for
our research and also helped each other out.
Furthermore, I want to thank Kedar Honasoge for introducing me to EDS and
SEM-spectroscopy.
I want to thank the students, who I have supervised during this thesis:
Raphael Hoepfl, who was both my first bachelor’s student and second master’s
student. Thank you for the countless TaN and GdN thin films, you have grown
and the corresponding countless hours, you had to spend in the Superbowls
sputtering system. Also, thank you for skimming through loads of papers from

234

the sixties on the different TaN-phases, which made our detailed density analysis
and TaN-phase identification possible.
Vincent Haueise, my second bachelor’s student and briefly also my working student, who mastered the art of fitting noisy FMR-spectra. I could always load
all the spectra with horrible signal-to-noise ratio on you and you would fit 100+
spectra without a word of complaint.
Yuhao Sun, my second master’s student for fabricating the various non-local spin
transport devices during your Master’s thesis. While the experiments, though
interesting, ended up being non-conclusive in terms of the physics at play, you
did an outstanding job in the complicated multi-step fabrication process of these
devices.
Thank you also to Johannes Weber, my third master’s student for all the help
on the magnon-phonon coupling experiments as my working- and master’s student. I am always amazed at the speed with which you manage to implement my
silly ideas on different CoFe/substrate heterostructures in the lab.
Franz Weidenhiller my reluctant fourth master’s student (thanks to Janine for
dumping this guy on me by the way). I learned a lot on magnon transport experiments by discussing your data and proof-reading your thesis.
Keita Takahashi, my third bachelor’s student for your resilient work attitude, which
allowed us to make great progress on our research on magnon-phonon coupling
in symmetric trilayer structures, which allowed us to indirectly verify the presence
of chiral phonons in our CoFe/Si-BAW-heterostructures.
Also thank you to Luca Schmidt for fabricating the Al1−x Scx N alloys. I learned a
lot by working with you on a project, which was completely outside the field of
magnetism.
I also want to give honorary mention to two master’s students, who showed
up in my office asking for help so much, one could be tempted to also consider
them as mine, namely Christian Mang and Julian Franz. Starting with the latter,
Julian, it was always fun to exchange our pleasant experiences in working with
the amazingly engineered Ultradisk machine, which exhibits no flaws whatsoever.
’Nobody expects the shitty deposition.’ Also thank you the Christian Mang for giving
me the opportunity to work on spin-wave spectroscopy in non-reciprocal devices.
Besides the WMI scientists, I also benefited greatly from the technical staff:

235

In particular, I want to thank Thomas Brenninger for always helping me out with
issues regarding the UHV clusters.
Furthermore, I want to thank Sebastian Kammerer and Astrid Habel for their great
help with supplying and managing the clean room equipment and chemistry.
From the technical workshop, I want to thank Georg Nitschke, Mario Nodes, Christian
Reichlmeier and Alexander Röß for helping out with the realization of the various
technical designs for the sample holders and resonator boxes.

From the Helium liquefaction team, I thank Peter Binkert, Harald Schwaiger
and Jan Naundorf for the supply with cryogenic liquids for my experiments.
Furthermore, I thank Andreas Russo for electrical engineering support.
I also want to thank our administration team: Emel Dönertas, Andrea Person,
Martina Meven, and Carola Siegmayer for always helping out with orders and
administrative issues.
Finally, I thank the cleaning staff Maria Botta and Sybilla Plöderl for keeping
the institute clean and neatly. Also, it was always nice to gossip with you.
For the various past and ongoing cooperations during this thesis I would like to
thank in particular the following people:
For the many helpful discussions and theory input for the manuscript on the inductive detection of spin torques in superconductor/ferromagnet heterostructures,
I want to thank Prof. Dr. Wolfgang Belzig and Dr. Akashdeep Kamra.
From the Physikalische-Technische Bundesanstalt, I would like to thank PD Dr.
Hans Werner Schumacher and Dr. Niels Ubbelohde for your helpful input for the
NbTiN resonator mansuscript.
I want to thank the ’black team’ of Prof. Dr. Silvia Viola Kusminskiy, Fabian Engelhardt, Dr. Victor A.S.V. Bittencourt and Dr. Mikhail Cherkasskii for the many useful
discussions and theoretical input on the Magnon-Phonon coupling manuscript.
Prof. Dr. Friedemann Reinhard and Paul Weinbrenner from Rostock for our cooperation on NV center magnetometry. In particular, thank you to Paul Weinbrenner
for remembering me from our shared lectures at TUM and for messaging me all

236

these years later, thus making this nice shared project possible.
Furthermore, I want to thank Prof. Dr. Sebastian Gönnenwein from Konstanz for
his helpful input on the Magnon-Phonon coupling manuscript.
From our partners in Madras, I in particular want to thank Dr. T.S. Suraj for
the fun times, we had together during my first real scientific cooperation project.
Also, I want to acknowledge Mayank Sharma for the many interesting and silly
philosophical talks we have had. I am glad, I could somewhat help you in your
scientific career by correcting your application presentation for San Sebastian.
Finally, I want to thank Prof. M. S. Ramachandra Rao for permitting your students
to stay abroad, thus enabling these pleasant experiences for me.
The same goes for our cooperation with Prof. Mashashi Shiraishi from Kyoto. During your three month stay at WMI, I had the chance to work with and personally
get to know Shugo Yoshii, which has been a valuable experience for me.
Furthermore, I got the chance to work in an interesting collaboration with Prof.
Dr. Haiming Yu, Hanchen Wang and Jilei Chen from Beijing. I learned a lot in my
experiences on the non-reciprocal spin propagation devices, you sent us and truely
hope, you can benefit from the CoFe thin films, I have deposited in the Superbowls.
Having been responsible for the superbowls and partially also for the Ultradisk sputtering system, I got to work in particular with many students from
the Walter Schottky institute being ’the guy, who yells at you, when you break
something’. Here, I have worked with many people and must shamefully admit,
that I probably don’t rembmeber everybody. From the people, i have worked
with regularly, I in particular want to thank Rasmus Flaschmann, Lucio Zugliani,
Christian Schmid, Fabian Becker, Stefanie Grotowski, Simone Spedicato, Stefan Strohauer,
and Fabian Wietschorke. I apologize for the people, I have worked with but are not
listed here.
From the EQT group, I want to thank Prof. Dr. Menno Poot, Timo ’you can still
sputter according to Manu’ Sommer and Giulio Terrasanta for our nice work together
on the integration of Aluminum nitride in phtononic circuits. In particular, I
enjoyed working with Giulio Terrasanta in the Superbowls and XRD lab. You had
many great ideas and your continuous efforts made the two resulting publications
from this cooperation possible.
Finally, from MPQ, I want to thank Stephan Rinner. I enjoyed our joined XRD
experiments on the Er-doped Si on SiO2 samples. Also, it was nice to catch up
with you after our shared studies at TUM. I am glad, you could use our results

237

for your research.
Being an inmate of office mates WMI 136 aka the ’grumpy office’ (also called the
’moaning office’ by Maria-Teresa Handschuh), I want to thank my cellmates over the
past three years: Dr. Philip Schmidt, Dr. Stefan Pogorzalek, Dr. Michael Renger, the
elusive Ivan Tsitsilin, Florian Fesquet and Matthias Grammer.
In particular Florian Fesquet for all of our countless late night working sessions,
Dice Throne duels, coffee breaks, jogs at Isar as well as the visits to Honghong.
Without you, my PhD at WMI would have been way less fun.
Furthermore, I want to thank Dr. Michael Renger, my ranting partner in crime.
You were always around the institute and willing to share your vast knowledge
on bureaucracy-, IT, or science-related issues. Also, you were always willing to
listen to my frequent lamentations without complaints.
I also want to thank Dr. Leander Peis (’Dr. Pnice’) for all our countless coffee
breaks and scientific discussions. Working in a different field, you always allowed
me to view my work critically from an outside perspective. My coffee discussions
have declined significantly since you left the institute.
Of course, this acknowledgments section would not be complete, without me
thanking Kedar Honasoge again for making sure, I stayed ’hydrated’ during my
PhD. We have spent countless fun evenings together be it at the Institute or at
Honghong.
The same also applies to Daniil Bazulin. Also thank you for giving me the
nickname ’Professor Muller’, which is following me around the institute with
even new people I had never met calling me that.
Thanks also to Niklas Bruckmoser and Monika Scheufele for sometimes even allowing me to attend your exclusive ’Eispause’ events. Also shout out to Niklas
Bruckmoser, who decided, my face should just be pasted on every meme template
in existence and filling my desk with hilarious memes.
In order to not further blow this acknowledgment section out of proportion,
I will abstain from thanking other people in a full dedicated text segment. For
many fun evenings and experiences, I want to thank Dr. Yuki Noijiri, ’Fab God’
Leon Koch, David Bunch, Dr. Thomas Luschmann, Maria-Teresa Handschuh, Malay
Singh, Ramona Stumberger and Philipp Schwenke.
Honorary mention to the Quantum computing group. I hope, you guys will

238

find Ivan one day.
My grandfather Dietrich ’Eirik’ Radspieler. I know, you would have loved to
bind also this thesis and show off to your siblings about your ’Hundling’ grandson. I miss you every day.
My sister Elena Hergenreider and her husband Sergej Hergenreider for our many
board game evenings and all the trips, we met together. I must admit, it was also
nice to get out of the Institute every once in a while.
My parents, Heike and Michael Müller, for your unconditional support throughout
my life and for being there for me, when I need you.

Now the trouble is over, everybody got paid
Everybody is happy, they are glad that they came
Then you go to the place where you’ve finally found
You can look at yourself sleep the clock around
— ’Sleep the clock around’, Belle and Sebastian

239

